Kelsey Hightower is known as one of the most influential voices
in the Kubernetes community.
But you wouldn't guess from how his career started.
At 19,
he dropped out of college to be a DSL modem installer,
became a self-taught developer,
and still went on to become a distinguished engineer at Google.
At age 43, he then retired at the very top of the industry.
Today,
we cover Kelsey's unconventional path into tech,
and how he kept creating new opportunities for himself,
often unknowingly.
The inside story of the container wars,
Puppet,
Docker,
Terraform,
CoreOS,
and how
If you're an engineer and thinking about your long-term career
trajectory,
whether that's getting into a staff plus level,
going independent,
or even quietly planning to leave the industry,
this episode is for you.
This episode is longer than a normal episode,
frankly,
because I was so glued to my chair,
mostly listening to Kelsey's stories and thinking.
This episode is presented by Antithesis.
Verify your system's correctness without human review or
traditional integration
tests and avoid bugs or outages.
Before we start,
I'd like to mention our presenting sponsor and thesis and maybe
offer a little
history lesson.
Over the last two decades,
software development has gone through a mindset shift from an
imperative approach
to declarative one.
Infrastructure is a perfect example.
Think about how tools like Puppet and Ansible allow declaring
how individual
servers should be configured.
Then came Terraform,
the ability to declare the desired end state of your whole
infrastructure,
servers,
networks,
databases,
and their relationships.
And then with Kubernetes, we stop scripting container life cycles.
Instead,
we write manifestos that say things like,
I want the replicas of this application exposed behind the
surface with this much
CPU and memory.
Once we didn't have to specify every little detail of our
infrastructure anymore,
deploying software became much faster.
But then the bottleneck became how quickly we could test and
verify the code to be deployed.
Testing remained imperative.
We had to write tests for every little detail.
And now with LLMs we're on the verge of a declarative shift in
the way code is written as well.
Just tell the model what you want and let it figure out the details.
And it's going to make the verification bottleneck a million times worse.
Anthesis is a declarative testing tool that can keep up with
your AI coding agents.
You state the properties you want your software to have and
Antistasis figures out
how to check them for you.
Verify your code as fast as agents can write it and ship with
ground and confidence.
Head to antistasis.com slash pragmatic.
Kelsey, welcome to the podcast.
It's so nice to see you in person.
Yo,
I'm actually happy to be here mainly because I kind of look at
your stuff over the years.
So it's an honor to be here in Amsterdam as well.
How did you make your first dollar at a job?
Oh, my first dollar at a job, McDonald's.
right that counts so in high school you get the job that's
closest to you so it was
in walking distance of my house as soon as I turned legal age
14 get a work permit
and I went there and it was one of those jobs where you know
you go you fill out
the application the same day you typically get your information
or you're going to
get hired the same day when can you start I'm like right now
The Pragmatic Engineer
you know people have expectations and I learned how to run the
whole store so by
the time I turned 15 I was a assistant manager so nights and
weekends you know
other managers would leave they would give this 15 year old the
keys and I knew how
to do everything there including close out the store right so
you have to count all
the money you have to fax this huge spreadsheet to corporate
every night and then
my mom would pick me up
And so it was really good learning how to really be responsible
even for adults at that age.
So that's how I got my first dollar.
How did you get into tech?
How did you get into programming?
In high school,
since I moved from California to Atlanta,
so you're going from one side of the country to another side of
the country.
And I missed maybe three to six months of school.
And in order to graduate on time, I had to take some extra classes.
And so as someone who played sports,
ran track,
played football,
played basketball,
and it's like you know there's this computer programming not
you know computer club
technology student association there was a class component and
then there was after
school component and I was like I don't know man this computer
stuff that's for the
you know you know I'm trying to be a cool kid but the one thing
I did I really
enjoyed it right so I had a liking to AutoCAD
I even competed at the state level in AutoCAD.
So we drove down and you compete.
They give you a task and you sit in front of the computer.
It was my first year doing it,
but I really liked the idea of taking a specification,
designing it,
and I probably would have gotten first place if I would have
got the product to
work because you also have to print it out so that the judges can review
your work.
So I got second place, even though I didn't print it out.
This is the 3D modeling.
Yeah, AutoCAD, you know, just AutoCAD.
Yeah, so part of the curriculum was, you know, you build bridges.
We did this thing with chapter team where,
you know,
you have a coat of arms and you're kind of doing like a debate.
Do you kind of
I learned all of these things related to business,
but CAD was one of the things I liked most.
Also in that class, one of the classmates taught me TI Basic.
Is that a version of Basic?
Well,
so TI Basic,
so you know the graphing calculator,
it's like a TI-86.
You can program it.
Oh right so in class they're like hey you know it's not just a
graphing calculator
you can actually program it and I was like what's that and it's
like look we can
you know everyone at that time you would create the snake game
right so it's
basically get a magazine copy and paste the code and then you
run it and now you're
playing snake based on the code you wrote and so you would toy
around with this
concept so that was probably the first introduction to programming
was literally programming my TI-86 calculator.
And after high school,
did you go to college or you considered college,
right?
I considered college because in Georgia at the time,
and still today,
there's a thing called the HOPE program.
So if you have a B average or above,
you can go to any public school for free.
And public schools in Georgia include Georgia Tech, Georgia State.
These are pretty good universities.
And so I decided to go to one that was near me
The first two weeks I was like, this is too slow.
This is not the pace that I want to move at.
And also remember, it's 1999 when I'm graduating.
And so when you turn on the TV,
people are standing in line for the next version of Windows.
There's a lot of euphoria.
AOL is starting to phase out and we're starting to touch on
high-speed internet.
And I was like, yo, look at the pace this is moving.
But also, you're hearing the narratives.
Bill Gates drops out of college.
These people are not necessarily glorifying the degree anymore.
It's all about the skill.
Now, unfortunately for me, I didn't know anyone that
was a programmer.
I didn't know anyone that was like a system administrator
because at that time,
all the systems were like Sun Microsystems or IBM Mainframe.
Those are still the things that are in the enterprise.
So when I look at the job openings,
I'm seeing a bunch of skills that I don't even know how to acquire.
And so instead of going to college,
you know,
I'm still doing fast food,
delivering pizzas at this time at Pizza Hut.
And I remember going to a bookstore and they had the A-plus
certification guide.
And I looked in some of the job posts and said,
hey,
you need to be A-plus certified.
Take this support role or whatever it was.
And I was like, you know what?
That doesn't require college.
The book is only $35 and I remember buying the book and it is an official
certification process it looks like it was part of the job
market and so I remember
buying that book and reading it cover to cover over and over
again and you're
learning all the fundamentals right you're learning about you
know how motherboards
and how memory and all these things work and there's an OS
component and there's a
little practice exam in the back
And so for someone like me,
having that fast feedback loop of like,
you put the CD in,
you take the exam.
And even though it was multiple choice,
you kind of felt like if I got anything wrong,
I would just go back to the book and make sure that I
understood what was written
there.
And then you go take the test again and had a little randomization to it.
So you can just rely on absolutely remembering everything.
And I remember going to the facility to take the test.
And you know, you're in that little room.
and they wanna make sure you don't cheat.
So there's a camera pointed at you and you're just going through it.
And so the nice thing about those tests, there's no trick questions.
Either you know it or you don't.
And I think they maybe give you an hour, hour and a half.
And I remember finishing that thing in like 10 minutes.
And when I walked down,
you know,
you wait,
the dial-up goes and they calculate your score and say,
hey,
you passed.
And then you walk out and you're like A-plus certified.
And that was like the first time in my career that I felt like,
oh,
so if you put the effort in,
You can gain the certificate.
And when I got that certificate,
I remember there was like a job fair where,
hey,
anyone that has A plus and network plus certification,
you can be part of the contractors that were replacing people's
dial-up with DSL at
the time.
And so that's how I, I guess, officially got into tech.
Is it fair to say that
You saw that this could be the most efficient way to get into
tech at the time?
I think I said I saw it as the only way.
Why was college never like telling you like, okay, that could be a way?
Was it just you didn't see examples?
Yeah, I never saw the examples.
I never saw the end game.
A lot of the stuff that they were teaching the curriculum,
it didn't make sense that you would pay all that money
you know look maybe it wasn't a good school maybe it was the
wrong class that I
took there's so many factors that could have went into this but
when I looked at it
none of the people that at the time that I was looking up to
this is not the path
that they seem to be taking and so I had enough of school right
if you're 18 at
that time you're like look that that's enough of this because
at the time I kind of
felt school was this because it was so easy for me actually
You know, it's like it was easy to get straight A's.
I didn't feel like there was a serious challenge.
So it's like, hey, I want to go and do four more years of this.
And I would later learn that,
look,
bachelors is a lot of the similar that you go through K through 12.
You kind of remember stuff.
You listen to the lessons.
But then masters, you challenge the material.
And of course,
if you make it to PhD,
ideally you're adding something new to the field.
And I never saw anyone that has made it that far.
So I never put that in part of my calculus.
So
But just having that immediate feedback loop of like getting this A-plus
certification and feeling like,
oh,
I'm ready to participate in the actual economy,
the ecosystem.
So to me, I was like, this seems like a better path.
And it felt like a path that I would control.
Yeah.
And then what was your first job that you could get with the
certification?
This was the Comp TA, right?
Yeah.
So at that time,
Bell South was,
you know,
the biggest telco probably in America.
You know, they had been broken up by that time from the AT&T days.
At that time, the people who did phone lines, right?
So those are the official Bell South technicians.
They drive the fancy trucks.
They have all the equipment.
And when they made the shift to high-speed internet,
that means you had to actually touch the computer.
And I think as a union, they're like, look, we don't touch the computer.
We don't even go into the house.
We get to, you know, the D mark and we stop.
And so they had contractors come in.
And the contractor's job were to come in,
have to do a little bit of wiring.
So if you had to run some cable, you did that.
Crate Cat5 cables, you did that.
Ooh, yeah.
One of my first jobs was actually cabling,
so I still,
I forgot the exact color code.
Orange, green, white, green, blue, white, blue, something like that.
It's burning your head now.
And, you know, so you did whatever it took.
And the other thing you had to do was you had to open the computer.
You had to make a decision, right?
If they had a new enough computer, they can use a USB modem.
Those were terrible.
They always broke and you would always come out for a repair.
But for a new install,
if you really wanted to do a good job,
you install a NIC,
right?
Cat5 port on the back of their computer.
And at that time, like we're talking Windows 98.
And so usually...
I don't know 20% of the time as you're installing the drivers
the computer would
crash and now you have a whole nother situation you have to now
troubleshoot
getting this thing back online or back operational but if
everything went smoothly
they now had a network card and then you had an external modem
that then you
connected to you know the phone line and they had this high
speed internet
connection and then you connected the network cable and I did
that for about let's
say a year and then I started doing the businesses so you're
going to people's
homes like you're going door to door
And then when you go to a business,
you would hook up one computer,
but there's obviously eight computers there,
and only one of them has internet access.
And I remember at the time,
you know,
the business owner could be like a small insurance company.
And they would say like, hey, how do we get all the other ones online?
And the first time someone asked me that,
I'm like,
I don't know,
man,
I don't,
we put it on one computer.
But like pay grade, right?
Yeah, we make sure it works.
But then I decided like, well, let me go learn.
And that's when I remember like going to like Office Depot
where they sell computer
equipment and things like this.
And I went in the store and I asked them,
it was like,
oh,
you can get one of these Linksys routers,
right?
The infamous blue spaceship looking Linksys router.
I still remember them.
And those things were probably like 50 bucks.
And I remember just buying one and figuring out how to get
multiple computers to
use one connection.
And so eventually I was like,
look,
I can't do it as part of the job because we have to do this and
we have to leave.
But here's my card.
And they will call you.
And I remember one of the first installations that I did on my
own,
they wrote me a check.
And I was like, yeah, you could just write it out to Kelsey Hightower.
He was like, no, we don't write checks to people.
We write checks to companies.
And I remember right there on the spot,
I'm like,
oh,
man,
I need a company.
And I just made one of DigitalGate.
and they wrote that on the check.
And I'm sitting there like, so how do you cash this?
So I went to the bank and they're like,
sir,
you're going to have to get a business license.
The business license, you could just do business as, you have to do this.
So I'm figuring out,
now I'm 19 years old,
like,
okay,
I got to go get a business license.
I have to figure all this stuff out.
So I do everything.
I open a business account just so I can cash the check.
But at that point, I'm like, oh, this pays more than this does.
And so I got really good at doing those network installs.
I really got good at troubleshooting because sometimes someone
gave them a USB
modem,
lightning comes,
the USB modem is fried,
and then you would swap them out for a network card.
And eventually I decided, I can probably do my own business.
And I decided to get some office space.
So I opened a small computer store right outside of Atlanta.
I would buy parts from the distributors.
I was just like 19, 20 years old.
And I wasn't buying enough to really qualify for an account.
But luckily,
one of the smaller computer stores I used to buy parts from
gave a recommendation
to the distributors like,
hey,
this is our guy.
He's just getting started.
And they gave me an account.
and I was able to buy motherboards and GPUs and people would
come over and like
they bring their kid and they would have a parts list I want a
computer with all
these things and we would assemble machines and you know sell
them but also it was
the headquarters for all the other service calls so I did that
for like three four
years you know that ended up evolving into at the same time but
now we're talking
like 2000 2001
A lot of the music studios were moving from analog gear and the
large mixing boards
to Pro Tools,
right?
The little rack mount unit and they all need it max.
They all need these conversions.
So I added that to my abilities and then I had a small setup in
the store and
artists and musicians would come in and say,
hey,
we want exactly that in our studio.
And I would get the order and I added it to the list of things
I could do.
I mean, at this point, you now have a small business.
Sounds like it's going well.
And suddenly you take a job at an employee job at Google.
When I look back, how did that come?
Because up to now,
it's almost like this is like,
you know,
the story oftentimes will continue.
You become an entrepreneur.
You grow your business.
You, you know, you just take it from there.
Even during that time as that store owner,
I managed a comedian and we went on the road and.
So you were helping out your managing?
Yeah, I had a buddy from my school.
He was a comedian.
Turns out he was actually really good at it.
I went to go see him at a club he's like hey I need a manager I
was like are you
even funny like I know you're from high school but I don't
remember you being like
funny enough that I would pay to see you tell jokes and he was
like I have a show
tonight and so I gave him a ride on the north side of town and
the interesting part
it was a predominantly black audience in Atlanta okay makes
sense and he did these
jokes and they laughed and it was one of these comedy clubs
where if you're not
funny you have like three seconds and they would just boo you
off the stage and
that's the end of it and he held it I was like wow you survived
that that's
incredible and you were pretty funny and then we drove about an
hour north and the
audience is predominantly white
and so on the drive there I'm like there is no way you can do
those jokes in this
room I gotta see how this is gonna go and at the time they're
only paying the
comedians like $50 so you don't make a lot in the early days
and he totally pivoted
the set and he held that audience too and I was like all right
I can be your
manager I know business I know kind of logistics I know how to
you know make a plan
together and I did that for a number of years and
You know, he won some televised competitions.
We went on the road with bands like Earth,
Wind & Fire and some large comedians from Kings of Comedy and
Queens of Comedy.
And I actually picked up some IT work with the company behind
it called Latham Entertainment.
They had been doing movies at this time.
and so now I'm like you know doing IT for them and I got the
small business I got
the comedian and so look I was able to save a lot of money but
man luckily I was 20
years old because I had all this energy but I was working quite
a bit eventually
you settle down you get a family and you do the math and it
turns out people kind
of over glorify entrepreneurship I think a lot of people believe there is
tremendous upside right the type of entrepreneurship we talk
about with software
companies the upside is crazy
But when you're doing like selling parts or service business,
unless you plan to open lots of stores and grow a larger employee base,
it's not the same growth trajectory as software companies.
And so I kind of did the math.
After four years of doing that, I said, look, I want to settle down.
And if you've been an entrepreneur before,
you know employees get paid first.
The owner gets paid last.
And there are months where you get paid last or you don't get
paid at all.
And now you're kind of drawing from savings because it's not
their problem.
But I did well overall.
Like I did very successful.
But I remember it's like, you know, I think I'm ready.
And so I looked around and
Google had data centers nearby,
and I felt like I had a great combination of skills.
I understood, you know, the racking stack part of the world.
I understood the physical part of the networking stack.
I understood everything from Linux to Windows.
I had an entrepreneur mindset.
I didn't think there was nothing I could not do.
and I remember going to that interview and they were hiring
data center technicians.
But what it paid,
and in my mind I'm like,
you only have to work for eight hours,
you don't have to issue any invoices,
and you get paid every two weeks no matter what?
No inventory?
This is crazy, no way they're doing this.
And so I go and I remember doing that interview and I didn't
know Linux that well.
And luckily for me, I knew FreeBSD well.
And as I'm answering the questions,
I'm like,
look,
I am not an expert on Linux,
not the way Google was asking these questions.
And it's like three people on the other side of this table just
rapid firing.
And I remember I was like, I know FreeBSD.
I swear I got lucky.
This one of the interviews,
I think they had a FreeBSD tattoo on their leg,
the little Beastie logo.
And I saw this logo, I'm like, oh, I'm saved.
And so we started going down the FreeBSD questions.
And I pass and I get this job in this data center.
And it was good because it's like,
hey,
I'm working with my colleagues,
but it felt a bit slow because you only get one job.
You come in,
you do this thing,
and I got really good at it because to me,
I kind of saw it as like a bit of a competition.
Who is the best data center tech here?
What do their metrics look like?
How do I exceed their metrics?
I want to learn how to do every particular thing in this data
center because
previously as a business owner,
the more skills you have,
the more money you can make.
And then I just started switching jobs every three to six
months because I just
wanted to explore everything to just amass my abilities.
And doing the math, I think every jump was like a 25% pay raise.
I mean, coming from a small base, it didn't feel big at the time.
But after a few jumps, my salary doubled.
Puppet was a bit of an inflection point in your career.
You know what?
I would say the biggest inflection point in my career was there
were two of them
before I get into Puppet Labs.
Okay.
So you come from Google, you see this huge operation.
There's hundreds of thousands of servers.
The cables are perfect.
They're immaculate.
Oh,
by the way,
can you help us imagine like what a data center back then
looked like at Google and
what did you do as part of the job?
Yeah, so in 2000, maybe four, maybe 2005,
That data center is like a warehouse.
I mean, it's huge.
So think about a place where,
and I'm pretty sure they always exaggerated the numbers.
So a exaggerated number to think about is like,
think about 200,000 servers in one place.
everything is immaculate so a lot of people have worked in data
centers and it's a
mess wires are all over the place you know you're ad hoc adding
and removing
servers but Google was systematic those machines came off a
truck they were wrapped
perfectly when you wheeled them into their spot you connected
the network cables
they would pixie boot they would burn in so part of the job was
you know you walked
around with a crash cart so depending on what your abilities
were some people had
pretty straightforward jobs you had a crash cart had all your
tools on it and
You would walk around and you would find machines that were
needing a repair.
So if you have 200,000 machines,
it's okay if like 300 of them are broken,
right?
The system can ride around that.
But if they were broken, they needed to be repaired.
So you would go to Rack A Server 7.
You would pull it out and you would look at it and say,
oh yeah,
the SATA card is on fire.
Like it's literally burned.
It's burning.
It was burnt.
And so he's like, I can diagnose this one with my eyes.
It needs to replace the SATA card.
But the thing is,
you would go into the system and you would say,
this SATA controller needs to be replaced.
So you will be making your prediction.
and then you would replace it and you would go through its
burning process.
It would join back to the fleet.
And then the way you were measured was how good were your predictions?
Oh.
Right.
So you said it's a SATA controller.
And to me,
moving fast,
you look as if I think that SATA controller,
I'm not going to waste any more time on this one because I'm
trying to get my
numbers up.
So I just swap the SATA controller.
You bring in all the cables, you slide it back.
It goes through its process and you move on to the next machine.
Before you get the feedback.
Yeah,
and fun fact,
there's a guy named Tim Hawkins,
very popular in the Kubernetes community.
He's like the network lead.
So back then,
Tim Hawkins is working at the other side of Google,
at the bigger side of Google.
And one of his first projects was a little tool that you would
put on the motherboard.
It had about nine lights on it.
and the lights would flash back and forth and it would tell you
what DIMM slots
were potentially bad.
The technicians that were fast,
they didn't waste time like running a program to do an
extensive test of the
memory.
You learn how to use this little device.
and you would walk up to the motherboard.
So the thing I would do is like,
before I do anything,
put this on the motherboard,
get the reading,
and I learned to trust it over time.
Dim one, dim two are bad.
And the goal would be, all right, I have all this memory on my cart.
You swatch those two dim slots,
make sure that that's done first,
reboot the machine,
and you might be like,
I think that's the only thing wrong.
And again, you were put in the system.
I believe I only need to do DIMM 1 and 2.
And the way you were measured is how long before that machine
gets kicked back to repair.
So if it doesn't get kicked back within,
I don't know,
30,
60 days,
you did a good job.
If you didn't, your scores would be low.
So for the technicians that were just reckless, they wouldn't even try.
You're just swapping the wrong part.
You're swapping the wrong hard drive.
And so your stuff is always coming back for repair.
You were not efficient.
So I got to the point where I can maintain high 90s, but also repair
Let's call it three times more machines than other people.
So lots of machines, rate of return.
And then I learned how to do the network switches.
And there's power audits where you're lifting up tiles from the
floor and you're
making sure that everything looks good.
You need to be careful not to touch them because you could die.
And so you learn everything about a data center, like the service loop.
You're running all this Cat5 cable.
It has to have a perfect service loop.
Fiber runs on a different part of the rack, right?
So you don't ever mix these things.
So as a person still,
like,
I'm in my early 20s,
I'm thinking this is how all data centers look.
It's not the case.
But it's crazy because just as I think back,
you know,
I was a manager before as well,
and of course a software engineer for a long time,
but
The way your performance was continuously measured and fed back
to you and you were
evaluated based on it,
it feels way more strict,
should I say,
than,
you know,
like folks who work at software engineers,
including at Google.
I mean, the frequency, the expectations.
The reason why I didn't feel as bad as some of the metrics
people are using now is
because I felt like I can control the outcome.
It didn't feel like it was a thing that was just a metric that
didn't do anything.
If I felt like my score was taking a hit,
and I was like,
you know what,
I am being a bit sloppy in how I'm diagnosing these machines.
And I remember one time where I almost had my score dip below 90,
I started writing additional shell scripts to start and
combining different
functions together.
It's like, you know what, I can't be moving this fast.
There's a way for me to diagnose multiple things as a machine
at one time.
And so I would diagnose the SATA array,
all the hard drives while I'm doing the memory component.
And then when it rebooted,
I would just run the script one more time as I'm putting my
cart back together to
catch that one more thing.
And once I started doing that,
I can move as fast as I want it and the scores are
So to me,
when the scores actually match the things that you're doing,
then it's a healthy feedback.
And again,
no one really talked about it unless you needed to talk about
it.
And so I kind of leveraged it for a personal thing.
I pulled it up in the morning.
I kind of looked at my performance metrics and in many ways I
calibrated my
strategy based on this detailed feedback that I was getting.
So I think I appreciated that level,
that granularity back then because it felt like it was
something that was helpful
for me,
not just my manager.
When you said you had two kind of big inflection points, one of them was
Google was a big one like that was definitely one of course my
entrepreneurship and
when I got to web hosting I went to a company called Pier One
they were a spin-off
of Rackspace and they were all about fully automated
self-hosting right so this was
back in like what 2005,
6,
7?
Yeah this is like yeah 2005,
2006 oh they were already all about full automated that was
their thing their
tagline was latency kills
And so back then you would go online,
a lot of the customer base was like people hosting their own
game servers,
right?
So if you wanted to play a game,
one thing you could do back then is host a game server,
but you needed a game server that multiple people could hit.
And so you would go along to server beach,
so this is a spin out of Rackspace.
So Rackspace is more like,
you know,
we'll buy a server and once you get it,
it's a lot of manual steps.
Rackspace was more of a let's automate everything so the
machine would pixie some
PHP scripts would run if you ordered a RAID setup then we would
configure the RAID
while the machine was netbooted and then we would put you on
the VLAN that you
belonged on
We would install the right operating system based on what
you've ordered.
And we just took a form.
We just went through all of these steps.
And then when we were done,
and it took maybe about an hour,
when we were done,
you had an IP address,
login credentials.
And if you wanted email and plus,
you know,
website management,
all these things,
you got it.
And when you were done, you gave it back.
And then we put it back into the pool, ready for the next customer.
And so when I saw how we were doing that, I was like, yo, this is...
Okay, you can automate things end-to-end.
The other thing that was important here,
we were doing things like updating the firmware for RAID
controllers because once
you pixie a server,
now you're in memory and you have access to all the hardware.
You haven't committed to an operating system yet,
but you have enough to do whatever you want.
So if you want to configure the RAID controller,
And back then there wasn't like clean APIs.
We were literally running curl scripts and command line
utilities trying to get
this machine into the right shape.
And then when we were done, we would put it into the fleet.
So at that early age, I'm like, oh, there is nothing you cannot do.
When we had to automate the Windows 2000 servers back then,
we would just build tools that would literally screen scrape,
log in to Active Directory.
And then we would screen scrape mouse movements so that way we
can patch software
on those Windows servers.
So the concept of like,
I need a specific tool to do is like,
no,
back then it was like,
you do whatever's necessary because these people are only
paying like $99 a month.
They don't have time for you to spend a whole week.
When they call, random customer, you don't know their setup.
You don't know their infrastructure.
You have minutes to get them back online.
So everybody learned to move quickly.
No complaining.
When you get that ticket, it's on you to figure it out.
Maybe you link to your teammates for help.
So I kind of learned how to move fast.
But the inflection point came from I started that job in tech support.
So people would call.
My MySQL isn't working.
DNS isn't working.
They can't even describe what isn't working sometimes.
And so I realized that we were all in the phone queue.
When the phone would ring, it would just round robin between everyone.
Then if you couldn't solve it fast enough or you couldn't solve
it at all,
you created a ticket.
and when the tickets sat there and then ideally you get to it
later but the ticket
queue was just getting long and when a shift change happened we
just had all these
tickets piling up and of course customers are now mad three
days no response so one
day I said look
I'm just not gonna log in the queue.
I'm just gonna resolve the tickets.
And I'm back in that entrepreneurial mindset.
I'm building little scripts to take a ticket.
I see the issue.
This is my SQL issue.
We need to vacuum the database.
This is easy.
Run that one.
Ticket close.
Hey, sir, everything is good to go.
Please try again.
Close.
Oh, this is not even an issue.
Plus, oh, we've got upgrade PHP.
Close.
And then the ticket queue is zero.
It's just empty all day.
And so someone's like, hey, Kelsey's not logged into the phone queue.
He's not even on the phone.
He's not taking calls.
my manager pulls me in the office like hey Kelsey why are you
not on the phone
queue I said because we don't all need to be on the phone queue
we can just have
one person
making the ticket queue stay at zero.
And then I would tell my colleagues,
hey,
look,
if you can't figure it out fast,
just open the ticket super quickly.
I will take care of it.
So some people specialize in Windows.
They got a Linux call.
They didn't know what to do.
I said, don't worry about it.
Just put it in the queue quickly.
Move on to the next call.
I got you.
And so I became super efficient.
So I explained this process to the manager.
He thought about it.
His name is Mike.
And Mike was like, yeah, I like that.
We're going to change it.
We're going to have a couple people stay out of the queue.
But the problem is, that queue has to stay zero.
And it's the first time I learned the difference between
activities and impact.
Activity is you being an all-star answering a bunch of calls,
but the ticket queue for the team is still high.
You making this jump and saying, look, maybe I stay out of the queue,
and my promise to my colleagues is impact the ticket queue is
zero so on Wednesday
when we do the team turnover we're handing off an empty queue
now of course I
didn't teach them that because I didn't think about it and when
we would come in
the queue would be high again it's like yo whoa this is not you
guys keep handing
off a bunch of
burden to our team.
And of course, we would clean it up.
But then the management team was like, yo, everybody's going to do it.
And then I was like, man, you can change the process.
So that was like the huge inflection point.
I think the next one was more about being a mature person.
Stop job hopping so much.
Because again,
after maybe a few promotions and some impact,
I'm now off to the next thing.
and I didn't have to necessarily live a long time with some of
those decisions or
stay long enough to really impact more of the culture.
So when I got to financial services,
it was the first time I got restrictions put on me,
right?
Because in these companies, everything is about moving fast.
Google, we got to move fast.
We have to compete with the big guys.
We're going to do a cheap hardware, smart people, any means necessary.
Web hosting, we're not charging a lot.
Margins are thin.
You got to move quick.
Financial service is like, no, we making money over here.
You joined the financial services company?
Yeah so that was the first time my salary doubled so I went on
my lunch break for a
job interview That must have felt awesome Oh my god I remember
my manager was so
upset
I went on a lunch break.
The previous manager, the one you left.
Yes, I met Pier One.
He was a good friend of mine named Joe Rodriguez.
He's the first person to make me a software developer.
So I showed him some ideas I had on like modernizing our virtualization,
optimizing our pixie boot process.
And he was like, man, you have a lot of good ideas.
So in the interview, he's like, show me what you built.
I'm so excited.
I'm still that entrepreneur thinking.
And I got the job.
So now I'm a software engineer working on this automation stack.
And I remember seeing jobs that I used to be afraid of five years ago,
the same jobs that made me want to just go get an A-plus
certification and open a
computer store instead of even trying.
And so I looked at those job descriptions again,
and it was like,
you need Linux.
I was like, I got that.
Even at that job, I got Red Hat certified, right?
So I was like, I got all the qualifications now.
And I remember the job.
I didn't know how much it paid before I went,
but you had to wear a shirt and tie.
It was the first time in my whole life
and wear a shirt and tie.
So you have to go and buy one.
Yeah.
And I remember my home ec teacher, she hemmed my pants for me.
I was like, hey, I got a job interview.
Does this look right?
I'm driving up on my lunch break and I get there and this is enterprise.
I'm like, wow, this is the big league.
I didn't even think Google was big league.
I thought financial services bigly obviously if you have to
wear a tie to do your
job you must be doing something so serious that you need a
shirt and tie to do it
and so I get to the interview and I'm sweating like they're
going to ask me stuff
that I've probably never heard or seen before and they started
asking Linux
questions I'm like
No, you gotta use this flag.
That's not the right flag.
No, look it up.
That is not the right flag.
You can't do that with grip.
No, you gotta pipe it this way.
The PS table doesn't show you that.
They're on that version of Linux.
Not with that kernel.
And I'm like, it's too easy.
And part of me is like, either I'm really good or something else.
And so I'm thinking like, yo, that was, maybe there's another round.
And so I'm driving home
and I'm loosening up the tie and I'm calling my wife like hey I
think I did a
really great job like you know and this has been a pattern you
know I get good at
something and I find a better job I got good at something I
found a better job but
now it's like this is like a career and so I'm talking to my
wife and I was like
hey I gotta call you back and it's the recruiter calling hey
you have a second it's
like 100% they want to make you an offer I'm like
Make your offer is different.
It's usually this is how much the job pays.
That's how it was until then.
How much were you making?
45k.
So you were making 45k at that point.
$90,000.
I almost drove off the road.
Like double.
This is insane.
I'm thinking 90 and you're doing the retirement calculations.
We can buy a house.
You're thinking of all of these things that you could do.
and so I'm on the way back to the job and I remember and they
were like when can
you start it's like Thursday I'm telling them we can start
Monday like uh two week
notice I'm like I don't know man like it's double for this I
have to so I remember
I called Joe and Joe's based in San Antonio where the
headquarters of rec space was
I was like hey Joe man hey man I gotta I gotta I gotta quit
he's like what man you
just you know what I'm saying you're doing so well on the team
how you gonna quit
on me I made a bet on you you know
I said, hey, Joe, calm down, bro.
They pay 90K.
He's like, what?
Are they hired?
And so I got to that company, Total Systems T-Sys.
And it did feel a bit slow.
They had run books, changed windows.
everything was regulated this is a financial institution we're
processing credit
card payments we're doing work for the government we're doing
all of these things
and I remember the team was just everybody just moving at this
pace but isn't it
crazy when you get in there I had something similar when I
moved into London and my salary more than doubled going for
Edinburgh where you
have all these expectations because you're being paid so much
more to tie same
thing for me for the tie and then it's a bit disappointing and
I think did you not
feel a little bit like am I missing something like this should
be you know higher
this should be you know the interview was okay maybe not as
hard but it was
something I mean I did because I was naive because I didn't
understand the
consequences of a mistake
And so, yeah, I was like, oh, these people are just moving slow.
And I looked at what they were doing and everything was like a risk.
If you made a mistake,
you remember,
you only get seven milliseconds,
seven seconds to give Visa a response.
If you don't, then it's a default decline.
Now everybody's losing money.
And so the cost of getting a good change, it was just worth waiting.
So I didn't know that in the beginning.
So I'm just like, oh, everybody's moving a little too slow.
I was seeing how they were doing deployments.
I'm watching how they're provisioning servers.
I'm like,
you know,
you can automate this whole thing because I've done it multiple
times.
And then I learned to be a little bit patient.
So I went, hold on.
I learned how to deal with the nose.
I learned how to deal with the executives.
I learned how to talk not just to engineers,
but to the senior leaders and get their trust.
And I won't tick about everything that I did there,
but I was there for about three years.
So the job had me stops.
And I remember there was a task.
where we were using Apache and some Java plugin to talk to our
JBoss instances.
And so they were using a lot of memory per connection on the
load balancer.
And so we got a new, we're moving off the mainframe.
We're moving into this new,
you know,
Java world and the servers just kept falling over.
We can handle all the transactions.
And I'm just watching the team go into these change windows and
then we fail,
we would fail,
we would fail.
And the CTO at the time was like, you know, this is costing us money.
We're getting chargebacks.
We're having to pay out penalties.
And I was like, I had a dev environment when I was using Nginx.
I got rid of all this Java stuff.
Like, it's just HTTP.
You don't need a Java connector thing.
I'm reading the spec.
You don't need it.
And my memory usage is a fraction.
By getting rid of it.
Yeah, you don't need it.
And Nginx had a better threading model, all of these things.
And I was like, I got a perfect config.
I've ported the Apache config to this one.
I even handle all of our redirects,
all of our routes,
all the legacy cruft.
This thing will work.
And it's like, I don't know, Kels, this is not certified stuff.
It's like, no, no, no, I got it from Red Hat.
RPM install Nginx.
It's in Red Hat.
And they're like, okay, it's in Red Hat?
Okay, sure.
I said, just give me one chance.
And about after a week, they gave me a shot.
and they let me be in the change window.
And what is the change window?
So change window typically in the financial institution is like,
we can start changes at midnight and we have to be finished by 6 a.m.
And you have to notify every customer.
We're going to change something in the environment.
Things may get a little weird.
We would like your permission.
And if it's something that can be detrimental to your business,
now's your time to speak up.
So once we got permission, we had a window.
that's the only window you got and if you can't finish it on
time you gotta shut it
down and get us back to where we were yeah roll back roll
forward or if you could
roll back and I remember I put Nginx in place so at this point
it's all you no one
at this company has Nginx experience also most people don't
want to do this they're
like hey we think this is a bad idea and so now it's your
reputation on the line
There is no hiding behind the team.
It's almost like everyone's sitting back like, you got it.
Now,
luckily the leadership was like,
we are supporting you and we're putting our careers on the line as well.
I mean, they probably would have been safe.
But after about two hours,
I got everything working and we just watched your memory
pressure just drop.
So if we were at 90% on utilizing,
let's call it 32 gigs and we're just blowing stack every time
everything's
crashing,
this thing is hovering at like,
Two gigs of RAM.
And everyone's like, yo, like, are we getting peak load?
Is this legit?
And we're all just sitting there like not sure.
And the way we used to test the platform is we would,
someone would drive to the gas station,
get a credit card,
buy some gas.
We want to see the transaction land in the Oracle database.
Yeah, you could track it.
So we can track the whole thing with like, yo, it works.
And so the thing is,
you can't really be comfortable until about 10 o'clock the next
day.
So now it's 3 a.m. We all go home.
I don't go to sleep.
I'm like,
yo,
we've changed a big part of the infrastructure in production.
Let's see.
So 10 o'clock goes by and we're looking around and there's no
Nagios alerts going off.
I'm like, man, we might be good.
You know me, I got top going.
I'm looking like memory usage is holding steady.
Yeah, top is...
For those who don't know that, that's when you chose the CPU.
You chose the PS tree in a loop, right?
So just like you ran the PSAUX command,
you see all the processes running.
And so you just run top and then it's basically that every
second being refreshed
or whatever timer you give it.
But one of the bets I made was if I get this to work,
you have to buy pizza for the whole floor for a week.
Every day we get a new order.
and because he promised like Kelsey if you get this to work
I'll buy you a steak
dinner and at the time I still am I was vegetarian so I don't
eat steak but here's
what I would like instead you got to buy pizza for the whole
floor now I don't know
how strategic I was thinking but I figured that I could score
some points with the
whole team from turning into a I succeeded to a we succeeded
and then people eating
together is one good way of doing it and I remember after it
worked he was like
what's the order
and I just ordered pizza from one place and just put it in the middle.
Everyone's like, what's the pizza for?
Because usually you only get this for special events,
like for the thing we did.
And the next day, some more pizza and some more pizza.
And so when I got that accomplishment,
I was like,
okay,
this is what maturity looks like.
It's not about just having the right solution.
You literally have to get consensus, buy-in,
make sure and then your reputation's on the line.
And I got that change and it just kind of changed the way I
thought about what
success looked like.
And so that was the inflection point.
And then of course I brought Puppet into that organization,
repeated a similar process of automating everything with this tool.
Kelsey just talked about what CICD looked like in the 2010s and
how difficult
deploying to prod was,
which leads us nicely to our episode sponsor,
Buildkite.
This type of manual deploy era was the time when Buildkite was created.
Engineering orgs were trying to figure out how to ship more
frequently,
more than once a week,
and those running into wall first turned to Buildkite.
Shopify started running on Buildkite in 2015.
Airbnb,
Canva,
Uber and OpenAI have all been using Buildkite for 7 to 12
years.
Throughout the 2010s,
the hardest CI problems in the industry for global software
leaders were getting
solved on Buildkite pipelines.
That's exactly what makes Buildkite the CI platform most in
tune with what's
happening right now.
Geniac throughput is pushing everyone's build queue to its limits.
Coding agents are pushing commits 5,
10,
50 times the volume that your defaults were built for.
The same architecture that observed Shopify's traffic at scale
five to ten years
ago now absorbed the share push from Entropic,
Cursor,
Meta,
Mistral,
Cohere,
VLM,
XAI,
Lambda and more who are all BuildKite customers.
Where other CIs are cracking under the weight,
BuildKite is running about 1.4 billion job minutes a week.
Agents run on your infrastructure or on BuildKite's.
Every artifact and log is captured.
And when something fails, you see the why immediately.
If you're hitting ceilings on your existing CI or downtime is
becoming more
problematic for your delivery,
head to buildkat.com slash pragmatic.
30-day all-access trial,
no credit card,
and an actual human engineer on the standby.
His name is Ola and he is very helpful.
I'd also like to mention our season sponsor, Sentry.
AI agents don't have a feedback loop from production observability logs.
But should they have it?
I mean,
we probably don't want to build a system where after each
production error,
AI agents automatically push out a fix into production without
supervision.
That would be a recipe for disaster.
But what if we did something more modest?
When a production error fires,
an agent investigates this with context from Sentry.
Sentry already has all the context in the error after all.
Sentry MCP is one way to plug in Sentry to agents that support
the model context protocol.
Cloud Code, Cursor, Codex, VS Code and Copilot, they all do.
After you hook up the MCP server, you can do some very useful things.
For example, you could do this.
When an already resolved Sentry issue resurfaces,
you can kick off a cursor agent to investigate their regression,
read the relevant code,
and open a PR with a suggested fix.
There's a little work involved to get all of this going.
You need to connect Sentry to your code repository,
add Sentry MCP to cursor,
Define the instruction for cursor's agent to investigate
Configure the trigger that
launches the automation and test that it all works.
But once you have it up and running,
you can get regressions fixed faster whilst they're reviewing
every and all fixes.
This feels like a sensible and healthy use of AI, NCP, and Sentry to me.
Check out Sentry at sentry.io slash pragmatic and start
monitoring and fixing regressions today.
And with this,
let's get back to Kelsey and when he introduced Puppet into his
organization and
automated DevOps processes.
And I remember we had someone from Puppet come by.
And then just for those who don't know Puppet, Puppet is this tool?
Configuration management tool.
So Puppet is,
we went from,
you know,
lots of shell scripts,
doing random things and pseudo automation.
But most of the time, you just did a manual thing.
You had a ticket come in.
Someone wanted a new SSH key on a server.
Someone wants something installed.
You did it manually,
copied and pasted the output in the ticket,
and you closed it.
and you did that every day over and over again and that's where
the saying that I
say sometimes some people have 20 years of one year experience
some people in IT
have been doing that 20 years in a row they never made the leap
to automation or
learning new tools or skills and so I saw like man maybe I can
bring in a tool
and I brought this tool called Puppet at the time 0248 and this
is right before
DevOps becomes a word but it's like all right I'm starting to
learn how to write
code like the for the Java production stuff I'm writing Puppet
you know manifest
using the Puppet DSL sometimes you have to write a little bit
of Ruby to build a
new resource type and I'm contributing and also I get
introduced to open source
like hey there's something there that doesn't work I'm going to
contribute it
upstream so I'm doing all this behind the scenes getting ready
for act two
And I remember my manager went to a conference and he came back
and was like,
hey,
Kelsey,
I finally know what you're doing.
I was like, what's that?
He was like, you're doing DevOps.
And part of me was like upset.
How do you get to name what I'm doing?
And so, you know, everyone's talking about DevOps.
And he's like, I met a guy named James Turnbull.
And James is an Australian dude.
He worked at Puppet Labs and he wrote the first puppet book
that I bought and read.
and so I'm like James Turnbaugh that name sounds familiar oh
I'm looking at my desk
James Turnbaugh and Jeff McCune so he's one of the co-authors
of this book and it
turns out James wrote a lot of tech books back then and he's
coming to the office
and my manager wanted him to check out how we were using Puppet
and I was like okay
so you know this is a world class expert and by that time I had
Puppet hidden
behind Jira tickets and so you could just open a Jira ticket
I had RPMs for everything.
You picked the RPM you wanted from a dropdown.
You picked your environment from a dropdown.
And magic happened.
And you got results.
Most people didn't even know Puppet existed.
Most people never touched it.
They just knew they can get anything on demand.
You could go to Jira and it does it.
So for example,
you could like provision a new machine or a whole environment.
I want database.
I want IBM MQ Series Message Server I want these three apps And
I need this
firewall set up No problem Open the right jar of tickets Get
them approved When
they're approved We had this little I called it Mr.
Resetti Alright One of my buddies gave me a name from some
video game Once it got
approved Mr.
Resetti would own the ticket And we would just extract the
custom fields And we
would just call the right puppet manifest And we would take the
output and update
the ticket And so PMs,
developers They just got what they want damn near instantaneously
So we built all the systems.
They didn't know nights and weekends.
I'm contributing to Puppet because,
you know,
it wasn't allowed at work at the time.
This is 2007, 2008.
They probably didn't even really understand what open source was anyway.
So they were just like, hey, you got to do that on your own time.
So I would just do it nights and weekends.
So James shows up.
And I remember we all get in the elevator.
We're going to the third floor.
My manager's introducing James to me, to our team.
Like, hey, this is this person, this is this person.
This is Kelsey.
And James turns to me, he's like, Kelsey Hightower?
Oh, we know you.
We love your contributions.
And my manager's just like, what contributions?
We're not doing contributions.
And James is like shaking my hand and he's just talking to me
like we're friends
because the thing is,
I have been working with the Puppet Labs team through like open
source contributing
to Puppet.
And so we get up there and,
you know,
my manager's like,
hey,
let's show him our setup.
I was like,
all right,
James,
we have a lot of Puppet manifests over here.
I'm using external node classifiers.
I'm setting a brand and config from data.
And I read Mark Burris' promise theory and got it all dialed in.
But from an interface perspective,
I just didn't want everyone to have to learn Puppet.
So we hooked it up to Jira.
I'm showing him this entire workflow.
And he's just sitting there like...
Yeah I have no recommendations at all like this is this is
amazing and here's the
thing that kind of the game changer so he came all the way to
Atlanta we're 45
minutes from the airport he spent time with our team and it's
the end of the day
and then he's on the way out and he's about to call a cab
to go to the airport.
I'm like, no, you're in my hometown.
I cannot let you go to the airport.
I will give you a ride to the airport.
So I get in my car and he's in the front seat.
My colleague's in the back seat.
He takes off his tie and rolls up his sleeves.
I can see all the tattoos.
I'm like, oh, so you're like a legit tattoo.
He's like, yeah, I'll do all of this.
I just did this for you all.
This is your dress code.
I was like, oh, James is cool.
He was like, man, yeah, you guys are doing great work.
And now I'm talking to the real James Turnbull.
And he invited me to give a talk at Puppet Cough.
and I went to go give that talk.
It was my first, like, real conference talk.
And I talked about some low-level kind of puppet integration
stuff and I had a
little comedy in there.
It was like the first time I felt like I could just be myself on stage.
Before I came home,
Lucanese,
the founder of Puppet,
we sat down in a little coffee shop in Portland,
Oregon.
And he was like, you know, would you like to work here?
And I was like, yes!
Of course, 100%.
And of course, there was a nice salary increase and I could work remote.
I'd have to leave Atlanta immediately.
I remember coming back and my manager really appreciated all
the progress I was
making over the years.
I kind of made a name for myself.
And I remember he gave me a nice little raise, just out of the blue.
And he slid this envelope to me and I opened it and it was a
nice number in there.
I was like, oh, that's great.
I was like, but here's the thing.
I'm resigning.
I'm going to go work for Puppet.
And then he said something that was dope because we had a kind of,
you know,
difficult relationship depending on how it went.
But overall, he helped me mature.
That's one thing I will always say.
He helped me really be mature.
And he was like, I'm surprised you stayed here this long.
Right?
It's like this ultimate compliment that you stayed here beyond
the just getting
better or making an impact.
You literally changed this culture.
Right?
and the full circle moment happened like seven years later when
Kubernetes came out
I remember coming back to that office and they had already been
running etcd in
production Kubernetes in production and even some of the old
tooling I had was
still running and to me that was like a really important
feedback that sometimes if
you make an impact lasting impact is way different that even
when I wasn't there
they still had the culture to say there's new technology and we
know how to bring
it into the stack So at this point
Containers were starting to start, right?
How did you first come across containers?
And very early on, you realized this is going to be big and important.
I didn't.
Oh, you didn't?
No, because I'm at Puppet Labs.
You know,
before that,
I was contributing to core Python stuff like VirtualInt,
PyPy.
I was on the team that was trying to integrate some of the Python.
Python had a package manager problem even back then.
and so I'm all in on Python and then when I'm learning Puppet
I'm all in on Ruby at
that time I'm thinking DevOps plus configuration management is
the end all be all
for everything and really at that time we're talking 2011 2012
in my mind the
competition was only between Puppet,
Chef and Ansible that was it and so I'm all in and I'm working
at Puppet Labs and
so we're kind of in some ways I felt like we were dictating the
future we were
going to companies and getting them to understand configuration
management
We were talking about the benefits of speeding everything up
and doing all these compliance.
We were moving people from SharePoint to executable code to
implement these things.
So we thought we were just getting started.
There was no world where we didn't think that we needed 10 more
years of that.
We even got money from VMware to integrate Puppet into that.
Chef was being integrated into AWS at that time.
So this was like the thing that finally, we're finally getting there.
We just got to teach system administrators to become engineers
via DevOps and start
embracing these tools.
And then the first thing that I saw come out was Golang.
And I remember sitting at my desk and I was like,
you know,
at that time we were hitting performance issues with Ruby.
The global lock interpreter,
you can't do more than one thing at a time,
not easily.
And so we moved to things like JRuby We even did Clojure for
some part of the
Puppet stack And I remember we were thinking about Should we
start doing stuff in
C++?
Should we start doing stuff in C?
But the problem is contributors What would we do with all the
Ruby contributors?
We were relying on things like RubyGems And it was going to be
a hard sell And I
remember downloading Go for the first time And the thing that
sold me on it
I remember one of the prototypes that I built was Factor.
So Factor is one of the agents in Puppet that gives you facts
about a machine.
So this is Red Hat,
this kernel version,
this is what the users look like,
and it would give that to Puppet so that your configuration
code had context on
what to do.
And that was written in Ruby,
and sometimes it will run slow because you're reading all these
files serially.
And so I remember it's like, all right, let's try this Golang out.
And I remember I wrote the code on my Mac,
compiled it,
SCPed it to a Linux box.
I was like, oh, this is crazy.
And I remember running all the facts in parallel.
And it came back in a fraction of the time.
I was like, yo, we got to use Golang for stuff.
And I remember the team was like,
nah,
it doesn't work for Solaris or AIX because Puppet is now moving into the
enterprise.
I was like, that's the criteria?
No way.
But I got it, right?
I've gone through this maturity thing before.
and then Terraform comes out.
But before Docker,
Terraform is starting to challenge things a little bit,
right?
And it's starting to use things like Go.
At least that was on my radar.
So Terraform is like, who cares about the node?
It's all about the APIs.
And all of us come from the server world and everything's about
an agent on a node
versus the clouds starting to take over at this point.
So Terraform was built with the cloud in mind, right?
You could configure your cloud environment infrastructure as a code.
Yeah.
And we were trying to do this from a node.
We were trying to teach Puppet how to talk through by having
this indirection where
you have to go through a node to configure a server in the cloud.
It's so weird.
but then Terraform Mitchell Hashimoto right like he was a big
part of the DevOps
movement early too then he was like Vagrant was written in Ruby
so he was part of
that same ecosystem and then he splits off and there's this
goling I'm like look at
that they're using go for this and I remember when Docker came
out Puppet at that
time was the one pushing innovation we're asking people to
think a little different
get out of their comfort zone and then Docker comes out and
most of the office was
dismissing this as like nope this is a fad
They don't even have config management in this thing.
They don't really understand enterprise.
This is just kind of, not like a toy.
They were not being disrespectful,
but no one saw this as a challenger,
what we were doing.
And I looked at it and I didn't get it immediately until I left.
When I left Puppet,
I built this tool called CompD and went to go be a VP of
engineering and I got to
write Go code.
So we started, rightfully so, we lifted all the Java heavy usage.
And I earned the trust of the team.
We started rewriting some of the microservices in Go,
shrinking our cloud footprint.
And we sunset it and got it all into production, the Go code.
And I was like, we don't really need Puppet anymore.
And I open sourced this project called ConfD,
and it would pull variables from etcd and generate just enough config,
just the parts of Puppet that I thought made sense.
And then Docker was out.
And then I was like,
wow,
we can probably stop moving Python files around.
We can probably package them up, not in RPMs.
The idea with Docker was,
right,
that it would define a virtual machine or a container,
right?
So to me,
the big value of Docker at the time was previously I had
definitely did the work to
make RPMs for every app,
even the custom apps.
RPMs?
RPMs are the Red Hat package management.
Yeah.
So if you're in a Red Hat system,
you can do yum install Nginx,
yum install Postgres,
but most people...
Even today,
don't package their third-party apps like the apps that a
development team would
write.
You're like, no, we just put CICD.
We'll copy them over there, maybe put them in a tarball.
But we usually never went to making official Debian packages or
RBM packages.
That puppet meant you didn't have to go through all of that
work and you could
still end up with a package,
something that was repeatable.
So all the stuff we used to do with Python and Virtual Ant,
all the things we used to do with RubyGems and the virtual
environments we have for
that,
we got rid of it.
You squished it all into a Docker container and you got rid of
a lot of dev tooling.
So this is why I think it resonated so much with developers
because we cleaned up
the mess of working on multiple projects.
And so
I was attracted to that.
Comp D was compatible with that.
And then CoreOS was the thing that I was like, you know what?
I think I know what I want to do.
But I didn't understand distributed systems,
not to the degree what CoreOS was doing.
So when I moved to CoreOS.
What was the idea behind CoreOS?
So CoreOS was like Google's infrastructure for everyone else.
And so at that time we did, there was a tool called Mesos.
The Borg paper had already been published.
I tried to read it when I was at Puppet Labs.
I don't understand any of this stuff.
Mesos is hard to install.
I couldn't justify it.
But we would see kind of the rumblings of the Twitter folks
talking about the
distributed system and all this maybe big data stuff is going around.
But I was like, I just don't understand it.
It seems incompatible with the stuff that I think about.
Even as someone who's worked at Google,
that had a system like this, right?
They had Google cluster file system at this time.
It didn't seem as complicated as this Meso's thing.
So I was like, ah, I dismissed it.
But what CoreOS did was build on top of Docker.
CoreOS was like,
what if we had an operating system that only had Docker on it?
Everything is written in Go.
We can have a little key value store where you can put your
config and we would
just synchronize it to all the machines.
And that was so compatible with the ConfD way.
And so I'm looking at this CoreOS thing,
I'm like,
yo,
this looks a little bit more like the future.
Because that's what we used to do.
You know, I had, at this time, I was a software developer at Puppet.
I was a software developer, VP of engineering at the other company.
And I was like, you know what?
Ops can learn a lot from the Docker way of thinking about the world.
Because as a system administrator,
we always try to make the OS small,
remove things you don't need so it can be secure and repeatable.
Docker was like, for the things that need to change, just put it here.
and isolate it.
And Coroes is like,
what if you had an operating system designed only to do that?
And I met the Coroes team at Go4Con,
a Go language conference,
and they saw me present.
And what I learned from the puppet days,
every presentation is an interview.
I don't think a lot of people think about it that way because
people are looking at
you on stage and
They get to see what you're about.
And so at GopherCon,
I remember also Rob Pike and the original creators of Golinger
and I was just like
the first GopherCon,
right?
And so the original creators,
Russ Cox,
all of these people I look up to,
Brad Fitzpatrick,
and they're all in the audience.
And I remember I had a talk
two things I'm sitting in the audience waiting for my turn I'm
number four on a
list or something like this and the two people who started
GopherCon they're just
from the community Brian Kettleston and Eric St.
Martin and they're new to this conference scene like you could
tell right you know
they weren't the best MC's in the world but they were like hey
welcome to GopherCon
and at the point in time Ruby is still dominating and down the
street there was the
Ruby conference going on and we were just in this other building
And I remember the first talk they introduced Rob Pike and he
gave this amazing
keynote around Hello World.
He went up all the way down to the compiler.
He went all the way up and he described how the language took shape.
It felt simple on the surface, but it went super deep.
And it's like Rob Pike had also come full circle from his AT&T
days through
Unicode,
through all the stuff that he's ever done.
And now we get to see one of his best works, Golang.
and my talk was titled Golang for System Administrators.
I wanted them to see that there's a better way.
The way they introduced Rob Pike, I was like, oh man, this is Rob Pike.
You gotta have more energy than that for Rob Pike.
So I'm sitting in my chair and I don't know them,
but I'm sitting with a buddy of mine from that company where we
rewrote everything
in Golang.
Billy Click,
we're sitting next to him and say,
hey,
Bill,
I'm gonna go ask them,
can I be the emcee?
He's like, what?
Okay, so I'm whispering.
And I walked to the backstage just like,
hey,
Eric,
Brian,
can I try my hand at being the emcee?
And they were like, sure, right?
And they knew at least who I was because they accepted the talk.
And so I don't know if it was after Rob, but I came out next.
So like, hey, I'm Kelsey Hightower.
You may not know me,
but I'm going to be your emcee for the rest of the day.
And I don't know what happened because it was my first time doing that.
I'm cracking jokes.
I'm having fun.
And I said,
hey,
from here on out,
when anyone comes to the stage,
it needs to be loud in here to the point where we can get kicked out.
And so I was,
all right,
so our next speaker,
and I think it might have been Derek Colston,
you know,
he's like a Googler,
he's talking about some ghost stuff.
And I remember it got really loud.
and then they come on stage so if you were a speaker ever
before and it's like you
walk up to basically a standing ovation you're energized
everybody is excited I
don't care what you do the energy level is high and so he comes
out he's having a
good time the audience is having a good time and then
eventually it was my turn and
I realized like who introduces me so I go onto stage I was like
I'm next.
So we're going to try it like this.
I'm going to go back and I'm going to come out and you guys are
going to make a lot
of noise for my talk.
And then I remember just like sliding slowly behind the curtain.
So everyone's now laughing.
And then the music comes on and I walk out surprised.
Like, hey!
And everyone's clapping.
And I do this talk.
And at that time it was live demo or nothing.
And at the time they had this thing called GoPresent.
So Rob Pike team,
they wanted to make sure they could use Go for everything.
even generating a slide deck presentation.
It was all in Go.
So you had this nice HTML representation of your slides.
You just open up your browser.
Hopefully it won't crash.
Hopefully it doesn't crash.
And you can run executable code in your examples.
So any code snippet you put there, it was formatted nicely.
And you had the little run button so people could see the
output of the Go code.
And so I was like,
hmm,
what would a system administrator value you can get from Go?
How can I prove it to them?
And so I wrote an iPixie server in Go.
And I remember in VMware Fusion, that runs on your laptop.
So if you want virtual machines on your laptop,
you can use Desktop Parallels or VMware Fusion.
The thing about VMware Fusion on your Mac,
you can create virtual machines,
but you can also swap out the network card.
And I did one where you can have a network card that talks to iPixie.
So I wanted to show them how I would boot up multiple machines
from a GoPixie
server running on my laptop.
So part of that demo, I had this kind of snippet of my Pixie server.
and I hit the run button.
So now my Pixie server is running in the background.
It's like, so what can you do with it?
And I remember looking in the front row and Rob Pike and team
were just intimately
looking at this thing like,
wow,
he just started a Pixie server from his laptop from GoPresent,
the slide deck tool.
And so this thing is running and I'm like,
all right,
let's bring up VMware.
I got to make sure we switch the adapter to the one that supports iPixie.
You got to do some firmware thing.
And then I remember I booted the VM and
You can see the logs in the Go present of like HTTP handing off
the image,
giving an IP,
and the virtual machine is booting up.
And you can just see the amazement on the audience face like,
did you just do that?
And then I booted another thing in the thing,
and I'm going through why I think that this is a game changer
for the craft that we
have.
We finally have a tool where we write high-performing things
with the simplicity of
imperative programming,
and we can go beyond just scripts.
We can actually build systems.
The audience was dialed in and it got loud.
Like after, you know, things were working, people were clapping.
I look in the back and there's a whole bunch of people now standing.
And I recognize some of the names because they're from the Ruby
community.
These are people that are writing the Ruby books.
And then,
you know,
after I'm done,
there's a break and I walk back there.
They're like,
hey,
we saw on Twitter that you guys are just like going crazy over
here.
It's out of control.
It's electrifying.
We left the Ruby event.
to come here.
And so I felt like, man, it had arrived.
But guess who else was there?
The CoreOS team.
The CoreOS team was watching me because I was pixiebooting CoreOS.
This is what I mean is every job is an interview.
The team was like,
all right,
we can see that,
yeah,
you should join the CoreOS team.
So that's how I ended up at CoreOS.
This is how I really felt like the container movement had legs.
And this is what maybe a year or two before Kubernetes comes out.
And then Kubernetes came out.
and you were starting to contribute to that as well.
Yeah,
so I'm at CoreOS and I think the thing that's very important,
a lot of software engineers,
sometimes they look at the people on stage and they ask questions like,
does that person know what they're doing?
Is this person just like an evangelist?
Did someone write this demo for them?
Did they give it to them and they just run the code?
Yeah, we think that, don't we?
Well, I mean, I can see why because sometimes
It's hard to value skills you don't have.
So a lot of software engineers are terrible.
If you put a software engineer, they can't talk.
They can't simplify concepts.
Maybe they can write code really well,
but this is a set of skills that they may or may not have.
And so when you see someone like that, you're questioning them.
And I remember giving a talk one time at Strange Loop about
etcd and CoreOS,
and someone was like,
Do you understand,
is etcd like a CA system or an AP system,
like the CAP theorem?
And the question was kind of loaded,
like,
we don't think you even know what that means.
I was like, etcd is going to always favor consistency.
He was like, that's not correct.
The RAF paper, blah, blah, blah.
I said, listen, you said etcd.
Let me show you.
This is the RAF log.
This is my three nodes.
I'm going to turn off two.
And you notice I can't write any keys.
So availability has been sacrificed.
consistency is being preserved.
I'm going to start another node.
There's going to be a handshake.
There's going to be quorum.
I will be able to write keys.
Now it works.
That's the cap theorem in reality.
So it doesn't matter what the RAF paper says.
You're talking about a RAF log on a single implementation.
RAF doesn't talk about cluster membership,
leader election,
how it's implemented,
and what you should do in the different modes.
That choice is yours.
And this is how Etsy-D is implemented.
And I remember he was like,
oh shit,
this guy actually knows what he's talking about.
Being at CoreOS,
we were working on our own fleet management system called
Fleet.
We were using Systemd and we were trying to synchronize configs
through etcd.
And remember in a CoreOS cluster, all the nodes communicate via etcd.
So imagine using systemd for those that have never used systemd
you put a unit file
like I want this process to start with these flags you know
bind to this port and
you put it in a directory and then systemd will start it and if
you had a thousand
nodes of course you could scp
that file to all 1,000 nodes.
And then there you have it.
So we decided instead of you copying all the files to all the nodes,
just put the unit file in etcd and the node that should run
those things would then
pull from etcd and just run those unit files.
And we called it Fleet.
So we had our own vision of giving people a distributed system.
About a year goes by, Kubernetes comes out.
And everyone was like, what's that?
and we got like a day notice.
So the Google team reached out and was like,
hey,
tomorrow we're announcing this thing.
Here's the GitHub repository.
You guys are under embargo.
Don't talk about it.
And so I'm thinking, we're not part of this story.
Our names are not in here.
It just says Google and Red Hat and they're going to announce
it at DockerCon.
There's no CoreOS in here.
So what can we do?
And I remember I stayed up all night.
I got access to the GitHub repository.
I'm reading all the Go code,
trying to figure out what all these binaries mean because
there's no docs.
And so I got everything working on CoreOS.
So when they did the official Google announcement,
of course,
there's a famous Docker keynote where they unveiled it to the
surprise of even
Docker to some degree.
And I remember they post their number one on Hacker News.
And then we post, hey, what they just said,
But here's how you run it on CoreOS and some examples and commands.
And I had to do a few patches to get it to actually work and I
had to build some
binaries to get things glued together.
You do that overnight.
Overnight.
I didn't go to sleep.
I'm just like, hey guys, I finally figured out how to compile everything.
I think the kubelet does this.
You have to put this there.
They had like a kube up SSH script,
but I had to reverse it because I'm not using Google Cloud.
We got CoreOS,
we're on bare metal So I have to pixie-boot some things But I
think if you put all
these things in the right place There's this etcd thing,
that's ours,
we know that So we know how to use that But I think the API
server connects to that
There's no volumes,
there's no config maps So all you can do is get this thing
stood up And then you
can submit a config And then it will just basically use Docker
in the background
Okay,
I can document that So we get everything to work And I write
this nice little guide
Someone on our team,
they publish it to the official CoreOS website So then we
relaunched that on Hacker
News
and then we go to number one.
And everyone is like, Google just announced this thing.
We don't know what it is.
And then Kelsey launches this thing.
We now know what it is.
We know how to install it.
We know how to run it.
So now people are downloading CoreOS just so they can play with
Kubernetes.
And I had a keynote probably in a week
I don't know what I submitted to the conference because usually
you submit like
months ahead of time.
I was like,
hey,
I know this talk was supposed to be about this,
but it's not today.
It's going to be about Kubernetes.
And people are like, what's that?
It's like, yeah, I just got announced.
I'm going to show you.
And I started giving people live demos of Kubernetes and how to
make it work,
you know,
using CoreOS and all of these things.
But the team still wasn't sold because we had our own roadmap.
and also at the time and you had your own fleet management
software yeah we had our
own fleet management and Kubernetes was now competing with it with fleet
specifically yeah and also we didn't know we can trust it right
remember Docker is
the king Docker is number one there's Docker Swarm right and
we're with fleet and
right now we're like Google also launched years prior a thing
called let me contain
that for you it was a container runtime written in C++ to
compete with Docker and
no one cared yeah
and so we didn't know like maybe no one's gonna care about this
either it's only
when I started going home and starting doing small
contributions and starting to
read everything and getting a feel for it I was like no there's
something here and
so maybe two or three months and luckily the founders of course
were really nice
Alex Povey and Brandon
they were just like they didn't get mad or anything I was
contributing nights and
weekends kind of like I was at the other company all of my
keynotes were more like
Kubernetes plus CoreOS and I remember at some point it was
inevitable we all got in
a room I became the product manager of CoreOS at the time and
Alex was like I think
you got the vision here and we got everybody in the basement in
San Francisco in
the office we were like hey guys all in on Kubernetes fleet
deprecate it.
All these things that we're building, deprecate it.
We're going to go all in.
And I'm glad we did because Alex Povey came up with the name Operators,
which is like a core idea in the Kubernetes community.
We put all this effort in there,
meeting another guy working on a thing called CNI,
which is the networking layer for Kubernetes.
And what Kubernetes really meant for me was that previous 15
years of experience as
a practitioner in the data center,
learning promise theory,
learning Puppet where it works well where it doesn't and then
understanding that
Puppet wasn't the only way and then making going through all of
these loops and so
when I ended at Kubernetes it felt like this would be the thing
I would build if I
only knew how and that's the way I explained it to the rest of
the world and at
that GopherCon maybe the next one there were people from the
now early Kubernetes
community it's a small company called Kismatic they were kind of a
Coral West competitive to some degree but they came up with the
idea like we should
have a conference just like GopherCon.
We called it CoopCon.
Joseph got the logo going and the Kismatic team kind of put up
the money for the
first event and we really welcomed the entire community and now
it's been 12 years
later and the CNCF has done a fabulous job of keeping it going.
Now there's like what 13,000 people here in Amsterdam keeping
that thing going.
So I asked this from Kat Cosgrove as well who was on the podcast.
What do you think really made Kubernetes break through and then
just become the de
facto way of orchestrating nodes and just winning again?
There was, at CoreOS, you were building Fleet, Docker had Swarm.
Like,
as you said in the beginning,
it didn't seem like this would be this big.
I think the number one success criteria was Docker.
So remember, there was Mesos and Mesosphere.
and they had their own runtime.
HashiCorp had come out with Nomad and they had their own runtime.
But the biggest runtime that had already got global consensus was Docker.
So by that time,
there were so many Docker containers and Docker workflows and
Docker Swarm,
maybe the Achilles heel to Docker Swarm was its design.
They tried to take the Docker API,
which worked really well for one node and expand it across
multiple systems.
And it was not the right API to scale to another type of thing
that we needed.
And so they kept trying.
They tried to add storage.
They tried to add networking.
But the Docker API was never meant for that.
And so the Kubernetes team was smart.
Instead of trying to say Google's better than everyone and everything,
they did a couple of things correct.
Let's just use etcd.
Let's just use Docker.
So you take those two things and you take the experience of the
people who wrote
the Omega paper,
which is kind of thinking about what would come after Borg and
at least the things
like Mesos.
So Omega was a system where Google would have built after Borg,
but they never built it,
right?
Yeah, so they had elements of it.
So like the omelet,
you know,
this like agent that would like be more declarative.
A lot of hints from the Kubernetes world that will come later.
And then just to be clear,
Borg was and is still Google's way of managing their back then
hundreds of
thousands now probably millions or tens of millions of servers
and they were best
in the world.
Yeah,
I think Borg was one of these things where you integrate the hardware,
the software,
the package management,
the configuration management,
MapReduce,
right?
Borg is this thing that just expands and grows.
In some ways,
I guess it's extensible,
but all of that insight and knowledge.
But then they get so much experience with that.
If you were to do it again, what would you do?
And you read the Omega paper.
and it's like here's how we what we learn from scheduling it
doesn't need to be
that complex especially for certain workloads you don't need
this like high
performance over engineered thing there's a simple way to do
scheduling especially
if you can get the scheduler a bit more metadata about the
workload the also big
game changes now instead of talking about Java versus Python
versus Ruby you only
have to talk about scheduling Docker containers
And so I think that's the number one success criteria that we
were already off to a
running start because you could just reuse the same Docker containers.
You didn't have to rebuild a new image thing.
So given that
What they tried to do in the early beginning was just fill in the gaps.
And in many ways, yes, it's a new system, but it fills in the gaps.
The one gap that they filled in was Docker had an entry point.
So if you needed a Ruby app that needed Nginx and your process,
you used to have to write a little shell script,
an entry point script that would do all of this magic,
almost imitating an init system.
Kubernetes is like, no, no, no, you don't need to do that.
You can just make separate containers and then Kubernetes will
run them as a process tree.
And so for many people,
it's like,
finally,
now we can have a clear way of thinking about application architecture.
Like blocks.
Now,
instead of like,
you have to open the entry point to see what we're going to do
versus full
lifecycle management independent.
So it solves that number one problem.
The other big one that I think that they solve,
number one,
we went from infrastructure as code to infrastructure as data.
And infrastructure as code is like, if this, do that.
Bring in this module, for loops, all this stuff.
And Kubernetes is like, no, no, no.
You have to specify exactly the containers you want,
how much memory that they need,
and then we have the status field to tell you if they were
running or not.
And you would take this data object that you could write by hand,
give it to an API,
and then the control loops would operate on this state.
So that means it didn't matter if you had Ruby, Python, or anything.
You can just take your IDE, write some YAML,
give it to another tool,
manipulate the YAML,
and then pass it down to the API servers.
You can build any combination that you want it without having
to be a compiler first.
That to me was a fundamental game changer that I don't know if
a lot of people
understood why it felt very easy to onboard the Kubernetes.
Kube CTL apply object.
Off you go.
And the last thing I think,
credit to Brendan Burns,
the ability to extend Kubernetes in a first class way.
OpenStack didn't have it Mesos didn't really have it in Mesos
you have a scheduler
and you built the other part of the scheduler so you can have Spark,
Hadoop,
Marathon but you had all these other tools sitting on top of a
thing so an
extension in Mesos was heavy almost like a whole nother system
the thing that makes
Kubernetes powerful there's a data model we gave infrastructure
a type system
So instead of imperative shell scripts, you finally had types.
So if anyone's ever come from like Python to a type language,
types do a lot for you in terms of cognitive overhead.
Like you really know what goes into this function.
If you put the wrong thing into this function, it doesn't even work.
Like you can't pass a string where integer needs to be.
Kubernetes brings the same semantics to infrastructure.
And finally,
now it's much safer to automate things because you're gluing
together things that
actually have structure and types.
I was about to say,
the reason we love types and every language just goes towards
them is safety and it
eliminates a whole class of errors.
Yeah, you can do things like static analysis.
You can have other tools compile different things and ensure
that they have the
exact same thing.
And you have this value that tells you that's not the right object.
That's not the right field.
And so once you have all of those things,
you can build a really nice deployment system.
So kubectl deploy these containers, no problem.
What about everything else?
So instead of trying to evolve Kubernetes to do everything,
Brendan Burns,
I remember sitting next to him,
he's like,
Kelsey,
let me show you this thing.
You can extend Kubernetes just by giving it a
description of what you would like your object to be.
So if you're thinking about this from the rest world, hey, I need a user.
Here's the credit operations and just give it to the thing and
it does everything else for you.
And so when that came out,
it's like,
so if I want to manage,
let's say a firewall.
Yeah, you can describe a firewall.
and you give that to Kubernetes and all the tooling works.
You can now say kubectl apply a firewall.
And so now we got tools like cert management where if you want
a certificate from
Let's Encrypt,
you can just say what domain you want,
where it should live,
give it to it,
and now you had a first-class extension.
You didn't have to uninstall it.
You didn't have to make some magical binary and it really
didn't matter what
language you wanted.
because once you put the data model in place,
you got the machinery,
and if you like Python,
you can have Python running the loop,
grab the data,
and then make it so.
If Bash was your thing,
you can literally pull the config using a Bash script and make
it so and just
update the status field.
That opened up the entire ecosystem.
So Cisco could come in, do what they wanted to do.
Red Hat can come in, OpenShift, and do what they wanted to do.
To me,
that was the game changer that brought the rest of the
community in.
And then you joined Google,
not very surprisingly at this point,
I guess from the outside,
of course,
but how did that go?
You've been contributing to Kubernetes as well.
The team was there.
Did you join the Kubernetes team?
No, so by that time, I met CoreOS.
Kubernetes has definitely taken off.
I'm giving lots of keynotes.
Now everyone wants to know my opinions.
I'm making all these prototypes.
I'm kind of moving things forward.
There's a Kubernetes book now, right?
I'm a co-author with Brendan Burns, Joe Beda at the time.
I'm like, you know what?
I'm thinking about my exit.
So in our careers, we do a lot of work to get into this field.
All the certifications,
the boot camps,
the studying,
some of us,
college.
And then once we get in, we're thinking about career progression.
Dev, senior engineer, principal engineer, distinguished engineer.
and we spend almost our entire lives on that trajectory and our
field is so young
that some of our pioneers are finally like no longer here for
the first time we're
not used to that and we're not really used to people retiring
like Rob Pike just
retired the concept of an exit for an individual contributor or
a leader in the
tech space is we don't we didn't have a lot of those
Linus is still at it.
He's not retired, right?
So we don't spend a lot of time thinking about the exit plan in
our field.
If you're a professional athlete,
your body will tell you when it's time to go.
And so at CoreOS, we reached this peak.
I felt like I've done everything I've ever wanted to do.
In the tech industry.
In the tech industry from 1999 to being unsure of myself,
to seeing myself on the side of museums,
buildings,
full landscape view because people were coming to see what I
think about where
technology is actually going.
And so it comes full circle.
You get a bit of a taste of the fame.
You can look at GitHub and you meet people.
We use your libraries.
We use your command line tools.
I started my career,
like some people were not even born when I graduated high
school and they started
their careers from those books.
And so I felt at the time that I had come full circle and I was
starting to think
about the exit.
Part of that journey,
I remember spending time with Jet Propulsion Labs,
JPL,
part of NASA.
And I remember being there and I was so excited because the
movie The Martian had
just wrapped up filming there.
And they gave me a tour of the facility,
like the Mars rover,
the new one before they launched it to Mars.
They were QAing, it was just going in a circle around the track.
And I'm like,
had a little laser on there so it can split rocks and they were
showing me how they
improved the wheels over time.
I went to another lab and
and there were a bunch of scientists working in there and it
looked like a fish
tank and I described it that was like yeah we determined that
if you want to
replicate parts of Mars surface and I might be getting this
wrong that the rocks
that you find in like a fish tank we can replicate some of this
stuff and maybe
it's slightly different than that so I'm watching these people
work and they show
me like how spacecraft has evolved over the last 20 or 30 years
and I'm like wow
you all seem to have an actual purpose
For the first time I've seen people using technology not to
just make more apps,
not to add numbers in a database,
but to actually have humanity do something.
And so they were not all about Kubernetes and Docker and Python and Go.
They were like, we're just trying to get a person to Mars and back again.
I remember part of the interview process,
their interview questions are,
if you had to deflect a meteor,
how would you do it?
But it has to hit one state.
So now you're in the leadership position, what would you do?
And you're just explaining the answer like,
you know,
I would kind of bring a bunch of experts and then,
you got to think about the ability to evacuate people and you
have to explain
yourself.
And the core part of my answer was you would have to explain
yourself almost 24
hour live stream.
Here's the trajectory,
giving everyone the countdown,
explain every decision you're making.
I chose transparency.
I chose truth.
I chose like, look, we have to deflect it.
There's no way to make it zero.
So we've chosen this state.
And this is the evacuation plan.
And we estimate that this number of people won't make it.
We're just being honest with you.
No need for conspiracy theories.
It's live.
And I was like, wow, what an interview.
A 20-year career at that point.
Never had an interview that made me feel that way.
And so I actually was going to go to NASA after CoreOS.
I even signed the employment agreement.
I was going to move to Pasadena, California.
and work at NASA on the Mars mission and lead up the
infrastructure and the
infrastructure teams.
And of course Google called and was like, hey, come to Google.
And at that point I was like, for what?
You have hundreds of thousands of employees
I admire Google.
I've been there before, but not in that capacity.
I was going to go to the headquarters.
Not to the data center, but to the headquarters.
And I've always admired people like Brian Grant,
Eric Toon,
Don Chin,
all of these wonderful people that I got to work with through
the Kubernetes
community.
In many ways,
I felt like I was already working on the team because by that time,
I had commit access to Kubernetes.
So I kind of felt like
All the things I wanted to achieve in that regard was there.
And so I was like, why would I come work there?
I'm just going to be a cog in the wheel.
I'm going to go there.
I'm just going to disappear.
They're going to just make me work on Google stuff all day long.
What's the value in that?
I've seen the peak of this.
And they were like, we won't do that.
I was given the opportunity to do DevRel.
And it's the first time I ever did it.
But DevRel represented freedom.
No tickets, no right code measured against SWE benchmarks.
I was like, I don't want that.
I wanted to be able to make impact.
And so the team was smart.
They were like,
look,
we got this area called DevRel and we'll let you define what
you do.
So you got to write your job description pretty much.
Yeah, but as an entrepreneur, I know how this goes.
How does it go?
If you come in and you really do DevRel stuff,
in my mind,
you're going to get fired.
Because if you limit yourself to the external perception of DevRel,
you go to conferences and you become more of an evangelist,
you do tutorials and guides.
For me, those are activities.
I'm a person of impact.
And so the first thing I did when I got to Google was like,
where's the customers?
How do we make money on cloud?
So I need to figure out how to talk to the customers.
So hey, where's the sales reps?
Hey, if you ever need anyone with Kubernetes expertise, call me.
I will fly to Disney.
I will go to Walmart on site and I will whiteboard for six
hours because that's the
revenue component.
So globally, went to Australia, Canada, doesn't matter.
We don't even have a region there yet.
I'm going to bootstrap it.
So now I'm growing my impact on the revenue side.
And the reason you said if you would have gone as devil,
you would have been fired because you would have not been
generating any revenue.
I just felt like I was going to be fired.
But this is just like thinking as an entrepreneur as like you want
I want to make money.
I want to make sure that I'm impacting the business.
And for most businesses, revenue is the criteria.
And no one ever made me do that, by the way.
It wasn't like, they're real, we're going to hit you with the metrics.
It's like, no, no, no.
To me, I understood the value of revenue.
So I would go out and I was able to do it in an authentic way.
I'm just talking about the same things I was talking about before.
And then product impact.
This is cloud.
Why limit yourself to Kubernetes?
There's serverless,
there's databases,
there's metrics,
there's so many things here.
So now I'm like, I need to learn everything.
And I want to employ all of my skills.
So it turns out my time in financial services means I could be
an exec sponsor.
I knew how to go from hello world to hello revenue.
So if I got into an exec briefing,
I didn't waste everyone's time showing them the latest feature
of Kubernetes.
It doesn't make sense.
They want to know how these tools come together to lead to
actual impact and outcomes.
And so I matured there.
And I also got smart.
You got to go to other teams and you read the OKRs.
So another team might say,
hey Kelsey,
we're really trying to get more adoption on our metric stack.
And I remember the first thing that I started implementing at
Google was a thing
called empathetic engineering.
So you have a lot of smart Googlers.
These people are brilliant.
I mean...
extremely brilliant to the point where the hardest problem Google had,
in my opinion,
was what to build.
Not how to build it, what to build.
They could do that.
And in some cases, you end up with like five messaging systems.
But the thing is, what to build seemed to be the most pressing problem.
And so the one thing that I tried to do was like,
how do you convince other engineers,
you know,
their manager,
How do you give them to trust you?
And I started these empathetic engineering sessions where the
first one was like,
get the Kubernetes team in one room,
all of them,
engineering offsite.
I want you all to install Kubernetes, but you can't use any scripts.
And remember,
some of them are distinguished engineers and principal
engineers.
Some of them worked on board.
Some of them are just the original creators of Kubernetes itself.
And it was so fun to watch them struggle because it's like,
do we install Docker first?
What version of Docker?
Can we put this on Ubuntu?
Or does it need to be Red Hat?
And so an hour goes by,
teams of four are like,
nah,
man,
this doesn't work.
I was like, great, you all can stop.
I'm going to show you how I would do it.
And of course, I know how to do this because I get to prepare, right?
So not a knock against them.
I'm just like,
all right,
Debian,
tune the kernel this way,
put Docker on there,
put etcd,
put the API server,
put all these things.
There you go.
That's how you do it.
And I was like, yeah, I mean, of course you had to prepare, of course.
And so
The question then was,
from an engineering perspective,
how will we make this better?
And then people were like,
well,
if we had OS packages,
this could have been avgit install,
and we could have just used local machiners.
Like, that's a good idea.
And someone was like, we will make that happen.
Another person was like,
even if you had those packages,
though,
you still need to know what order and where the config files go.
So kubadmin was born,
which was a command line tool that gave you a procedural thing.
But the other thing that I remember from my career was,
I don't want just a tool that abstracts everything from me.
I want to know how it works.
So I wrote the guide, Kubernetes The Hard Way.
And that guide is what I used to help teach people at GitHub in
the early days,
pre-Microsoft,
how to like run Kubernetes on bare metal and walk them through
that guide.
And so it was that empathetic engineering that helped me make a
huge impact on
cloud because I can go to every team,
every org,
and instead of guessing what their roadmap should be,
giving someone who would spend time in the field,
Given someone that had this enterprise background,
hands-on experience across lots of tooling,
I knew where people were coming from,
I would say,
based on where Google sits in the landscape and in the
competitive landscape,
given what our abilities are and what our customers need,
I think this is it.
But I never said it that way.
I would get everyone in the room you would have them discover
it have them discover
it and nudge them so you knew what you think the key the most
important problem
areas were for example and then you orchestrated a session to
help people I tried
to always know the two things in multiple product areas that
would make the most
impact aka revenue that would get adoption and so and then
launches versus landings
you would put all these things in motion
They would land at different times.
So launches is we ship the thing, people have a big celebration.
I know that doesn't matter as much as the landing.
People are actually paying for it.
So when I got good at that cycle,
the promotions were a little predictable because I would be
able to make impact.
Sometimes you build prototypes and sometimes you would
contribute to things like
Cloud Functions.
But the overall goal though was to use every skill you had.
So working with PMs, we got to add Go support to Cloud Functions.
We're the team that made Go.
Amazon has support in Lambda for Go.
We need to do this.
And also,
I have a keynote at the next GopherCon and I'm talking about
serverless.
And I have two choices.
I have to use Lambda or we can use Go functions.
And so we sprint.
We get it done.
We get all the Googlers reality.
We get it checked in.
It's in alpha.
And I tell the PM, hey, you want to go to GopherCon?
We'll launch it on stage.
We launch it on stage.
We tell people how we designed our worker, how the internals work.
and then they can just come sign up that was the trifecta you
do the work you have
the vision you execute you launch and you land land and the
landings compiled over
seven years is how you go from like I think maybe L5 to
Distinguished Engineer L9
that's like four promotions yeah four promotions seven years
But it's interesting because a lot of times when you ask someone on,
you know,
how they got promoted,
let's say,
yeah,
four times in seven years at a place like Google,
I would expect just being naive that they will tell you like,
okay,
this is how I planned or like,
this is what you need for each level.
But it sounds like it's a very different,
you just had landings that created impact.
And you were focusing,
do I read it correctly,
that you were not focusing on your promotions or the next level.
You just wanted to, you know, do the best work that you could.
Oh no no I was focused on the next levels because that was the
goal because think
about it if my whole career I've always tried to acquire the
skills and make the
impact so I can move to the next level and so I googled the
levels were expressed
as promotions and there was a point in time in the org that I
was in there was no
level 7 for an individual contributor so now we have to make a level 7
And then once you get to a level 7,
now you kind of pave the way for the other people that want to
come up through that
icy path.
And then level 8 isn't the same as level 7.
Level 8 isn't the same, or level 9 isn't the same as level 8.
And yes, there is a formula to some of the promotions early.
So from 3 to 4, 4 to 5 is a little formulaic.
You have a ladder,
there are things that are expected of you,
and the decision-making on those type of promotions are localized,
meaning your manager,
maybe a director.
But then outside of that,
though,
when you start to go higher,
it's now expanded where there's now other teams that have to
understand your impact
in a way that can't be biased by a local team.
So if you think you've made a lot of impact and then people
across the org do not
agree,
that allows you to really throttle what impact means,
right?
Because if it's just your team, I really like this person.
Now everyone's a distinguished engineer.
And so I think Google did a really good job of saying,
look,
it was okay to be like L5 or 6 for your entire career.
Yeah, that's their terminal level.
I think it used to be L5, now it's L4, actually.
Oh, okay.
But they moved it back because I think L5 has gotten a bit
tricky and they don't
want to fire pretty good L4s.
Exactly.
And I think for a lot of people,
you can follow the formula and get to where you need to be.
But I was like,
at the time,
I think there was like a couple hundred distinguished
engineers.
So as an entrepreneur, if you show me the top of the mountain...
I want to get there.
So then you were targeting,
you were like,
all right,
how can I get to the next one,
to the next one?
And impact was the name of the game, right?
Yeah,
and I guess the only thing I would probably add to the moment
or to the situation
was I wanted to do it authentically.
And so there was one part of the time,
I remember I didn't get one of the promotions,
but I was getting promoted pretty fast.
So,
of course,
people were like,
dude,
you need to actually make an impact before you get promoted again.
Stop it.
And that was good feedback.
But I remember I took a chance.
So there's a pattern to doing a promotion package.
structure.
There's examples and you go through all of this stuff and you
get feedback.
I remember one year I was like, I'm not doing that.
This year, I'm just going to talk in like the first person.
Hey, I'm Kelsey.
I work on these things, not these things.
These things are important to Google.
So here's exactly what I did.
But more importantly, here's the people I brought along.
Here's the teams I've impacted.
And here's the results of this.
So I did this project and here are the results of that.
And I'm talking in this way like I'm ignoring the process.
I don't really care about the template and as someone who at
that point in time was
on some of the promotion communities where we're looking at the
promotion packets
and making a decision as a team I decided to write my packet
for those people
so that when they got it,
because look,
if you're having to do a read a lot of these,
it's hard.
You're like, oh man, they're all so dry.
Everyone's being very safe.
Everyone's only telling me what I want to hear.
I don't even know the person after reading this whole packet.
I said, I'm not going to do that.
I want them to see me as if I was in the room
advocating for myself and I remember getting feedback on that
packet like Kelsey
this is like come on bro this is you know things I was taking
it seriously I wasn't
making a mockery of it I just wanted to make sure that they
understood what I was
doing and I was aware that I wasn't just trying to play the
game I was trying to
approach this process authentically and I got promoted off of
that packet and look
it could just be sometimes the work sometimes speaks for itself
But a lot of times people can't see the work if it's not
presented correctly.
And so that kind of slingshoted me.
And the reason why I tell this story is that every
distinguished engineer doesn't
get there the same way.
Everyone thinks like, oh, how much code did you write?
What complex thing did you build?
And for me, I think it was the impact on Google Cloud's culture.
The empathetic engineering thing became an official thing that
they used to onboard
other engineers.
It became things that had a whole team behind it.
They used to go give them in a product manager that would
evolve the program and
integrate into HR.
The philosophy around other engineers saying,
Kelsey,
we just did an empathy session.
I want to show you the results of it because we're about to ship it.
and then engineers started really thinking about the customer.
I mean,
Amazon was always known for that to some degree,
but to help Google get on the same page
I mean,
I'm pretty sure other people had an impact,
but there was a direct line of impact from those type of
programs and also me
diversifying,
moving away from Kubernetes into the serverless realm,
moving to the world where you're helping out the Postgres or
the Spanner team at a
Postgres interface,
the Go team,
getting a little bit better with cloud,
just making other people successful around you is one of those
things that helps
you become distinguished.
It's the impact, the ability to influence.
Before you got to the distinguished level,
you shared a story about Microsoft and an offer.
Can you tell us about that?
Yeah, so I'm one of those people.
I don't like ultimatums.
It's hard.
An ultimatum would be you're working at a company for a couple of years.
You're doing a really good job.
I'm just going to make up numbers here just to protect everybody.
But let's just say you're making $100,000.
And for a lot of times, you could be happy with $100,000.
And so a company says,
hey,
we're hiring and you go there,
you do an interview and they say,
look,
we're paying $120,000.
At that moment,
you're actually worth $120,000 because you now have evidence
from the market.
The $100,000 you currently make doesn't look so good anymore.
You can't unsee a job offer for $120,000.
And so now you have to make a decision.
You can commit to that.
Leave your job and go make $120,000 and start over.
or you can do the ultimatum thing.
If you don't pay me 120, then I'm leaving.
And that puts everybody in a weird predicament because
sometimes it doesn't have to
be that adversarial.
Sometimes it's just,
this is evidence that,
hey,
look,
I want to advocate for myself.
I know we're not in promotion cycle,
but I believe I'm worth 120 and I would like to have that conversation.
And someone would say, hey, well, you need to go prove it.
It's like,
well,
I have an offer if you want to see it,
but I would rather be here.
and that can turn into a you went to go look for another job
it's like oh my god so
I'm stuck here It can have weird dynamics right especially with
your manager or
your management chain Exactly so I was always weary of that but
I also knew that in
business that's just how it goes and so I'm really at the peak
now I'm thinking
like early retirement I probably can get out of here at what 55,
60 if I continue on this pace and then Microsoft is like hey come through
And look, I never had an executive recruitment process.
So by this time, I'm probably considered an executive at Google.
Once you hit like L7, you're kind of considered like an executive.
What is an executive?
So an executive just means that you probably have an admin to
help you with some of
the tasks you're doing.
You're probably going to be asked to be an executive sponsor of
things and programs.
So if a team wants to have a program for something and
There's gonna be a budget for that.
You may have to help oversee that program,
so they need executive sponsorship.
Another engineering team knows that they're gonna need budget
for something,
and they need someone that has a little bit of political capital,
a little bit of weight in the organization to help endorse them.
That can be executive sponsorship,
or you might be assigned to one of the largest customers the company has.
But that executive set of duties means that you're gonna be
making impact above and
beyond yourself,
typically to support other parts of the organization.
So I grew into that at Google.
Microsoft was like, we want you to start there.
And here's the thing, I didn't think about my role that way there.
I'm still the old Kelsey from CoreOS days, right?
I'm just doing well here.
And I wasn't going to interview at Microsoft.
I'm like, for what?
I'm at Google.
I mean, I had a lot of freedom at Google.
I was making impact at Google.
I had a good reputation at Google.
And so I'm like, no, my trajectory is fine.
I'm not doing that.
And to be honest, I don't like Windows.
I didn't like Azure.
I don't like .NET.
I like GitHub.
VS Code is nice.
But my whole career, the majority of it, has been rooted in authenticity.
I've been working on the things I actually like and care about.
This would be one of the first times,
maybe outside of some of the enterprise roles,
that I'm going to go work on a set of technology that I
wouldn't use on purpose.
And so I went there and I met the Microsoft team and the weird
thing though is I
had a recruiter and they swapped the recruiter out and it's
like hey our mistake
I'm like what do you mean mistake this person is super nice and
they asked for a
resume and I didn't have a resume because it's been seven years
Well it's been
actually 15 years at that point since I ever had to show
someone a resume so I'm
like resume oh man I haven't made one of those in a long time
I'm looking online for a template like what's the style of
resumes these days and
so I'm like trying to figure out a resume I'm like see this is
why I don't waste
time interviewing I don't got time for this anymore and they
swap the recruiter out
and say hey sorry about all that we don't need no resume sorry
that's not this kind
of process what we want to do is make sure that you meet the
right people who
represent Microsoft
I was like, okay, that's different.
So I get outside,
I'm like,
okay,
what kind of quiz questions are we going to be prepared for?
Because I'm not doing quiz, bro.
You had committed access to Kubernetes.
You wrote the book on Kubernetes.
You're leading these things.
You helped start Kubernetes.
Come on, like you have a Wikipedia page.
Like there's,
we don't need to try to figure out whether you make the impact.
We can just look at GitHub.
There's evidence there.
And so I'm meeting all of these leaders.
they're bringing all these people who are behind the scenes I
remember me and Scott
Gunthry from the first time and I didn't really know who he was
because I just
didn't know how I didn't know the lineage and the history of
Microsoft and you know
of course I'm looking up who these people are and
and I was like wow this is they're courting me oh this is what
that feels like I
mean Google did it a little bit too but not like this was like
I'm looking I'm
looking at the these are the executive directors this is like
reverse interview
they're not interviewing you they're trying to sell themselves
you know what and
that's the thing that I appreciated a lot because they were like
This is your career.
You've built a fantastic career over there.
We can't ask you to throw that away without understanding what
you would be doing here.
And so it was like you can,
if you want to understand the business,
if there's someone you haven't gotten a chance to talk to,
just give us a name.
And I'm talking to them and the one thing that I really
respected about Microsoft
was I think by that time they had also acquired GitHub.
And so they had a big vision for themselves, a lot of diversity,
And I was like, okay, there's a lot of opportunity here.
They're also all in on Kubernetes.
They had just acquired people like Deas and Brendan Burns is there.
So I was like, all right, Kelsey, you can come and make an impact.
There's room to grow.
I'm like, all right, I might do it.
All right, so I'm glad I did the interview.
And I get home and it felt like that time I doubled my salary I
told you on the way home.
And I remember I get this email from Satya, the CEO of Microsoft.
I'm like,
man,
he wrote this nice email,
Kelsey,
that heard you had a good experience with the team.
Remember, I did the interview at the Microsoft headquarters, right?
So, hey, heard really good things from the team.
Just wanted to let you know, you know, you're going to be respected here.
We're going to support you as a team.
I'm like, damn, support as a team coming from the CEO?
And the offer was like a PDF.
It's an attachment.
So I read this thing.
So number one, what an honor.
This is the CEO of Microsoft.
He has so many more important things to be doing than to be
emailing me about a role.
And I open a PDF and very often in your career,
there's a zero get added to the equation.
And so you're looking at this like, I didn't even know that they do that.
We know that it happens,
but the person that graduated from high school in 1999 that
chose the A-plus
certification didn't know that was available.
even while I was at Google having all the success and Google
paid me pretty well
too but I know you can add another zero still and so I'm like
whoa this is this is
crazy and I'm like wow so I um I showed my wife and she was the
one that said you
should just go interview like put your ego to the side and
let's go see what's out
there so shout out to my wife
And so I get the PDF and I'm like, okay, this number is perfect.
Honestly, I don't know what to say, but just find out.
Like, is this really the only number?
So I remember giving a counter.
Like, you know what?
I think it should be this.
And the funny thing is Microsoft countered back higher.
So we're not playing around.
I'm like,
oh,
now I understand that I don't understand this part of the game.
And so I have this offer and I knew that I wasn't going to go
interview there if I
wasn't serious about taking it.
so I was serious about going to Microsoft in almost six years
at that time at
Google and I went to my manager I had the same manager which is
legendary at Google
I had the same manager for six years straight even with all the
reorgs same manager
the whole time he was a director so even when I got leveled up
they allowed at
least someone one level above still to report to a director and
I had such a good
relationship with them I told them what happened I said I
wasn't looking and they
asked me to come in so I went in
and I'm going to take it.
Number one, it will be financially irresponsible to not do this.
So that will be the driving force.
And also,
I get to stretch myself in another way and see if I can make an
impact again.
He's like, okay.
But there's no ultimatum.
I'm leaving.
And he's like, I'm just curious what Google would say.
I said, no, not great.
I don't want to do ultimatum.
Yeah, you don't believe in us.
I mean I do believe in it but I didn't want to do it you don't
want to do it yes I
didn't want to do it because you understand the dynamics the
dynamics especially I
in many ways Google had been really really good to me in every
facet so it wasn't
ultimatum time it was more like I've earned it and he said that
too I gave him the
PDF and he looked at it he just started smiling and like oh wow
whoa and then he
said something that was really dope he says I want you to know
you're worth every
penny of this
That was a game changer because he knows me like no other
person I've ever worked with.
No one knows me as well as Greg does.
He knows my strengths.
He knows my weaknesses.
He knows my ambitions and my motivations.
He knows all of them.
For him to say that was important.
And so I'm thinking...
If Google wanted me to be at that level,
they would have done it already.
But also, pragmatically speaking, no one really knows your situation.
All these people have thousands of people they manage.
They're not targeting you or being mean to you, at least in my case.
And so maybe they thought I was making that kind of money already.
Maybe they thought that I was already a distinguished engineer.
How would everyone in the org know?
They got other things to worry about.
So he presents the thing to them.
and I think within hours they're like this is no problem like
hey here's the you
know don't worry about that number here's a bunch of stock and
all these things and
I'm looking like whoa whoa so now I have the money and I'm at
the company I want to
be
and you didn't do an ultimatum I didn't do the ultimatum so I
felt good about the
relationship I didn't feel like there was going to be some
retaliation I had no
fear about that and I continued to be successful eventually got
promoted to the
distinguished engineer at Google told the Microsoft team no but
the one thing that
people saw from this I didn't talk about this at that time but
I did do a tweet and
the tweet was different company same team
a lot of people was like what does that even mean different
companies same team but
people were you know retweeting it and they liked it and people
were just like oh
it's because of the community stuff and how the different
people in the community
work together and that was part of it
But a big part of it was that moment that Microsoft got me the
biggest raise in my
career at Google.
And about three to six months later,
I was in San Jose and Satya was there.
And his admin's like,
hey,
Satya would like to just,
you know,
meet me with you.
I'm like, the CEO of Microsoft got time to do anything?
So I'm in San Jose and then I go to this hotel and the admin
meets me downstairs
like hey Satya's kind of ready to see you now and I'm going up
and now he knows I'm
coming right like let's just say the meeting's at one o'clock
he knows I'm coming
for like days and then you go into the hotel room and like the
the doors are open overlooking the mountain range.
And Satya's sitting there overlooking the mountain range like a
Vanity Fair photo shoot.
And I remember before on the plane ride there,
I'm reading his book,
Hit Refresh.
And I remember the opening chapter,
he talks about starting Microsoft as a developer advocate and
now being CEO of
Microsoft,
advocating for the soul of Microsoft.
because he had been there so long until the birth of the cloud
and all these things.
And the book was actually a pretty good read about his
trajectory in the industry
and his time at Microsoft.
So now I'm done with the book and I'm about to meet him.
So I have all of this context in my head.
So when I walked through,
I felt like I had this rapport with him for some reason because
I read the book.
And then he's looking out over the mountain range and I walked
through the door,
I was like,
Satay,
why are you sitting here like this?
You knew I was coming,
so you're just posing like we're doing a photo shoot.
And he just started laughing.
And so the tension, at least for me, was way down.
And we had a discussion,
I won't repeat everything here,
but he said something dope.
He said we were sitting around at the table
And we asked ourselves, what executive did we want that got away?
That means that you still were in the minds of at least some people.
It's like you were on that list.
And we had a discussion and he was very transparent.
And he said, we gave you a good offer.
We think we gave you a good offer.
And at that time, Thomas Caring had just come from Oracle.
My personal opinion, I like this leadership at Google.
But I can understand why some people were afraid of the Oracle
DNA being brought to Google.
And I think maybe some people in the industry felt like,
oh,
this is a moment to go and maybe poach a few people that didn't
want to make that
transition.
And he said something like,
we gave you an offer as if you were running away from something
and we should have
gave you something to run towards.
And I was like, damn, that's poetic.
And so we wrapped up that meeting and I really felt like,
man,
I actually belong to the industry.
It wasn't like I'm a Googler or a Kubernetes person.
I really felt after that moment that I was an industry person.
So I was very comfortable at that point retiring within the
next year or so.
You talk with Satya Nadell and about a year later, you retired.
How did that thinking come up?
Because you were mentioning that
You kind of had your retirement,
you were thinking about your kind of end game or exit game.
So before joining Google,
I kind of felt it was going to be possible,
right?
Because now I'm making money,
I'm saving,
I really practice a whole life of minimalism.
You know, I live way below my means.
So even when the money changed, the lifestyle did it.
I was very conservative in terms of what I was spending.
I didn't care about jewelry.
I didn't care about buying cars to impress other people.
That was gone.
I felt free from it.
that kind of thing in society.
So the money started to become like freedom tokens.
This money means I can get out of the game.
And so everyone,
at least the people I know or what I attempt to do,
you set this number.
and then when you blow past the number and if you're still a
little young you're
like well maybe I can change the number but the thing I was
careful not to do was
to change the lifestyle because I watched people around me
change the lifestyle so
you can make a lot of money and still be broke and I was like I
want to avoid that
because at that point I used to ask questions why am I doing
this and for me
personally I felt like I was lying to myself I love this job
and it's like no you
learn to love it and being someone who was good at it
You tried to figure out working around the people you like
helps you love it a little more.
Working on the things that you're curious in helps you love it
a little more.
But you can't deny the pressures of just enterprise, stock price.
You know, this person wants it now.
There's a debate on whether we should do this or do that.
There's personalities involved.
There's parts of it you didn't love.
And then the other one I thought about was time.
Everyone thinks they're going to probably live to 90.
or a hundred, or we don't even think about it at all.
I think a lot of us just don't think about it.
Right,
and maybe it's not healthy to think about it,
but at some point,
I think around maybe 37-ish,
I'm thinking like,
what's the point of doing all of this work?
Why are we doing this?
And I used to ask that question in my job, why am I doing this?
Why am I writing Python?
Well, it's because you're a software developer.
It's like, that's not the answer.
That's the easy, obvious answer.
So I learned to just zoom out.
And when I started zooming out on my career,
it's like,
what are you doing this for?
Because once I started having a better answer,
when my daughter was born,
I'm doing this for her.
I'm doing this for my family.
I want to make sure that we're all safe and protected.
And so I started just changing my attitude.
So for example,
when my daughter was born,
I remember just taking a job where I could work overnight.
I'm just gonna go work in a knock I don't really care about
this job as much in
terms of career progression as long as I can be home with her
so we don't have to
do daycare I'll take my shift my wife takes her shift but this
was the priority so
then I started to structure my work life around this now I was
never great at work
life balance I won't lie
My daughter goes to sleep.
I'm back on that computer trying to learn new skills.
I probably approached a lot of burnout in my career.
I'm glad it's not just you.
No, yeah, I ain't gonna lie.
I did not have that part figured out.
And also the thing about burnout,
what I think is interesting is if you play professional soccer
and you put in a lot
of effort and you lose every year,
you're gonna feel burnout.
I'm doing a lot of work and we never win.
But the teams who actually win play more games than everyone
else because they have
to play the playoffs,
semifinals,
they got to win World Cup.
And if you win it multiple times in a row,
you play way more games than everyone else.
But for some reason, the champions aren't tired.
Yeah, they're not burnt out.
Because,
I mean,
they probably are,
but they ignore the feeling because they know what's on the other side.
And so my career had a lot of winnings.
So as I'm pushing the limits, you're getting the win.
You're pushing the limits.
So some of the burnout that is psychological,
you just dial it back because like,
The Pragmatic Engineer
How much money do you need to live off a fraction of this money?
And I started just making the calculations.
And then you start negotiating salary around these particular things.
And you start asking yourself,
am I making an impact that is worthy and deserving of these things?
So then,
of course,
you get into things like investments,
startup stuff,
blah,
blah.
But then I'm starting to say, oh, I'm getting close.
I can see it now.
Which looked impossible early on.
It looked impossible.
So like halfway in my career, it looked impossible.
Maybe my 401k would do something and how much does Social
Security pay and if I do
everything just right.
And then it was like, oh, I don't need Social Security anymore.
I don't care what the stock market is doing.
But I have to stay the course and be disciplined.
And I have to structure my career in a way.
So once I got that light at the end of the tunnel,
I started making decisions based on that.
I'm going to bet to go to CoreOS instead of something that pays
way more money.
NASA looked great.
that man this changes the trajectory over here at Google plus
I'm going to have to
step way up to be able to walk on that particular stage at
least that's what I told
myself but also Google is the type of place that could pay for
performance at that
level so I was like wow this is a good opportunity and so now
that I spent all
these years thinking about why do you work I never had a good
answer but I never
accepted the lie and so I was like I'm working to be me
and you become a distinguished engineer,
but you realize you're a junior person.
You didn't put as much work on learning how to live and the
relationships and the
things that you do when the computer gets turned off.
You didn't put any effort into that.
Not a lot, not as much effort as you put into the work.
What parts are you talking about?
Is this the kind of the friendships?
Is this the outside of work?
Is this a community?
What
Just developing myself.
So most of my friends I've known for 20 years.
We talk on the phone all the time.
I see them.
I fly.
That stuff is important.
I've been married for 20 years.
I'm going to celebrate my 20th year anniversary in a couple of months.
And I feel like the core parts of my life that I wanted to be
healthy and stable,
I think I did those things.
But there was things where,
you know,
I remember going to Budapest for the first time and stayed an extra day.
So it wasn't leave as soon as the conference is over.
it will stay one more day and I remember hanging out with
people like Liz Rice and
her team and they were like we're going to a bath I'm like
what's a bath it's like
oh it's like a big swimming pool and we went to one of these
huge parks where
there's like you walk in circle and you go in the building and
there's all these
plunges and I was like this is not the kind of thing I do the
truth was it was the
kind of thing I never did didn't even know so I said sure I'll go
So I went there,
we rented some shorts because I didn't bring any swim things.
It wasn't on the agenda.
We were there for like three plus hours.
And I was like, man, what an experience.
And so when I got back home, I didn't talk about the conference.
I didn't talk about the keynote.
I talked about the escape room we went to and the three hours
we spent at the bathhouse.
The escape rooms are all so good, yeah.
And so I was like, what the hell was I doing?
I was moving too fast through this thing.
And so then I started dialing back a little bit.
So hey, I gotta dial back a little bit.
And then little things.
Like, as a minimalist, I always tried to live intentional.
So it wasn't like the first time.
I just realized there were other areas where I wasn't being as
intentional.
I remember when I was listening to music, I was like, hey,
my wife can sing and she knows the lyrics so sometimes I'm
singing a song she's
like that's not how that song goes and I'm like it was what I
remember and now when
I listen to music I actually pull up the lyrics and I listen
while reading the
lyrics so I can really understand what the song is about
and it's little nuanced things like that where I was like hey
life doesn't need to
be so fast and this is why you see me sometimes online like the
fact that people
are over indexing on productivity doesn't necessarily sit well
with me because it's
like
If you just do productivity, you're gonna miss everything.
You're gonna miss the experience.
You're gonna miss this part that are hard.
You're gonna miss the collaboration with your team.
If you just go through too fast,
you're gonna move right past it because you're a human.
You're not a computer.
You're an actual human and you don't work only for productivity.
Maybe that's what your job believes you are.
And there's that saying, you're not your HR title.
And so for me,
part of that was like dialing back to like,
oh,
you're a human.
Act like one.
So I started to invest in like my relationships,
talking to people,
being patient,
go to the school board meeting,
do some of the offsite things,
spend more time with your child and her games,
teach her how to drive instead of going only to driving school.
Cleaning became a big part of my everyday routine.
And look,
if you have enough money,
you can hire someone to clean your house for you.
No problem.
And there's actually nothing wrong with that.
But boy,
I enjoyed the parts where it reminded me of all the success
you've made.
There are some people who don't have a stove.
There are some people who don't have a refrigerator.
And so when you would clean them thoroughly,
like take everything out,
look at all the expired food,
sort everything back out,
clean it back to the condition when you bought it,
put it all back together.
And what I noticed was for the people who had
In my opinion, success, they could afford to do that.
It is a luxury to be able to afford to go slow.
Because when you're really,
really busy,
you need an admin because you can't afford to book your own tickets.
When you're really busy, you cannot afford to clean your own house.
And some people would say,
I make way more money having someone else clean my house and I
can go make money
doing everything.
It's like, I promise you money isn't everything.
It is not.
And so for me, I said, wow, now I have time.
Because some people only have money.
Now I had both.
And I decided that I could actually slow down And the thing
that maybe some people
noticed Even my outward projection changed I was way more
methodical And so the
work changed The keynotes changed Because I started to
incorporate the philosophy I
brought the people into the keynote And I started asking
questions like I know what
I want to show them But then how do I want them to feel?
Because sometimes I wanted people to feel excited
Sometimes I wanted people to feel a little bit embarrassed by
the state of our
industry and the complexity that we added for no reason.
And I noticed I was just starting to be,
like the full Kelsey was starting to be on display.
So then I was like, all right, it's time to retire.
What am I going to walk out to?
And luckily,
I was practicing just enough of like who Kelsey is to start
doubling down on that
as a retired.
And I didn't necessarily do a good job.
I'm only three years into this.
So I'm a junior retired person.
And I make time for lots of things.
But I still want to hold on to all of this knowledge,
all these parts of our craft.
So I'm still doing advisory.
I'm doing investing.
I'm still doing public speaking.
I don't speak as much about low-level technology things.
I do try to put a little bit of philosophy in there,
but I know that I'm still holding on to that part of my ego.
Can you tell me a little bit about the advisory and the investing,
both how you got started,
what advising means?
I think a lot of us software engineers are curious about this
and some of us will
have opportunity and also the investing part,
the good,
the bad and the ugly.
You can now speak freely.
Yeah so look I think if you're a software engineer as you
progress in your career
you will be an advisor because if someone wants to build
something a junior
engineer does exactly what they ask if I get this ticket I want
to do a good job I
want to get it done on time exactly as you ask bugs and all and
then as you get
more experience you know that the person's asking may not know
what they're asking
for so you're going to be an advisor hey if we did that
is going to add a lot of complexity and you're not going to get
what you want.
What I think you want is this, let me show you.
And as an advisor,
You're not necessarily the person's boss.
You're just trying to give them something that they don't have.
So you're advising.
Sometimes you become an engineer and you get really close to
the executive team
where they check with you before they make any big decisions.
So you're an advisor.
When you start to advise at a very high level,
then you also share the outcomes,
right?
A lot of software engineers that work at larger tech companies,
they have equity.
So if you just don't focus on heads down, do your job,
and you get into more of those advisory roles,
then you start to realize that maybe you start to have a little
bit of effect on
the stock price,
right?
So my actions, if they turn out well, then we get there.
So, okay, so how does advisory work in the startup world?
When I first started doing it, it feels like an exact waste of time.
Number one,
VCs have large amounts of money so they can invest in a
thousand companies and
ideally one of them will return the entire fund.
But when you and I do like individual investing or advisory,
typically when I started advising,
you would take advisory shares.
99.99% of the time, they're worth absolutely nothing.
Number one, you're going to get diluted to hell and back.
You don't even know how the taxes work on this thing.
You may exercise them in the wrong way and you may end up
paying money and getting
nothing in the end.
So then you start having this allergic reaction to like advisory shares,
especially if you get the ones that are way low on the totem pole.
So then I'm like you know what I'm never going to work for free
I used to say this
to myself you can't be working for free can't be working for
free and the people
who respect you they'll never let you work for free and so when
someone say hey
Kelsey we want to advise I say stop this when I first started
it was like I need
some equity so advisory shares but I understood something
different now I said look
I might need a quarter point,
half a point,
or a whole point,
depending on where you are with your funding rounds,
how much risk am I taking,
giving you this time,
and how much impact will I make?
Let's say I ask for a quarter point of a company.
Cool quarter point being 0.25%.
Yep, of equity.
And I would say,
look,
you know,
I used to think you can be advising for four years.
That makes no sense, actually, in my opinion, from experience.
Advisory, I think, is really good for like a year at a time.
because advisory should have impact.
It shouldn't just be like this,
hey,
let's talk about what we're doing and you just give superficial advice.
Like, no, it should really make an impact.
So if you're going to make an impact, then you've earned the equity.
And so what I started doing,
instead of a four-year investing,
I would say,
look,
I need one year,
no cliff,
10-year exercise window.
Never losing again Not on early access Yeah,
so that worked really well So you look at Carta and it's all
stacking up But I
realized that I wasn't necessarily avoiding the working for
free problem Because if
they don't have a good exit,
you still get nothing So I started adding the retainer
component And the retainer
component,
I used to think about them as dividends So you may give a dollar amount,
it could be $1,500,
it could be $3,000,
it could be $5,000 And you get that every month for that one year
and so in your mind it's like alright I get $60,000 plus equity
and now it's like
alright you should probably call me because it's just a very
expensive person
sitting there I remember the first time I had a decent exit
I advised a company, Pixie Labs.
They were doing observability.
It was a small twist.
On Kubernetes, they were doing this observability.
And what they were doing is leveraging EBPF so that way you
didn't really have to
add any agents or instruments.
So the way EBPF works is you almost get to the kernel level.
So if two applications are talking to each other,
At the lower level, I can actually see that networking traffic.
I can see what port is buying to.
And I can also see that it's a Go program.
I can even walk the tree like a debugger would.
And so they were doing observability this way.
And they had,
you know,
almost like,
hey,
we're going to compete with Datadog or something like that.
And as an advisor, I looked at it and said, look, you could try that.
But most people are really not interested in changing
observability stacks just for
a slightly different way of doing things,
even if it is eBPF.
Now, what do you think it should be?
So they're in stealth mode.
Their investors are like, yo, it's time to come out of stealth.
We got to start, you know, getting some revenue from this thing.
I said, hey, we need a few more months.
And we need to take another approach.
So I'm sitting with the team and I'm like, you know what you have?
You have like an agentless thing.
And they also have this thing called Pixie Scripts that allows
you to kind of make
your own dashboards or get your own metrics.
And I started like,
oh,
if you're a system administrator,
you can wrap them like command line tools and you can like
create a thousand
clusters with these Pixie Scripts.
and so this idea that we should pivot just a little bit change
the messaging just a
little bit before we come out of stealth and they gave a couple
of presentations
with this agentless observability and then we did a keynote or
we did like a pixie
day before coming out of stealth and we show system
administrators this new vision
it went well I did this opening keynote I showed the vision I
interviewed the
founders and like why did this need to exist why not just date
a dog the next day
They had offers.
I think one of them was from maybe VMware,
but the other one was from New Relic.
And they got acquired by New Relic.
And I was like, wow, what does this mean?
And I remember the lawyer came and said,
hey,
we need to accelerate all your shares.
And this is the money we owe.
I was like, whoa, this can work.
But also, I felt like I actually made an impact.
We did pivot.
And then the way it works in advisory with VCs,
they like returns and word gets around.
Kelsey's advisory can have impact.
So other founders are coming,
VCs are recommending some companies that need help.
So over time,
you know,
some founders reach out,
like Guillermo from Vercel reached out,
like,
hey,
Kelsey,
this is when they were making their pivot from just being
purely serverless and
front end to thinking about going a little deeper in the stack.
So I spent a couple years with the Vercel team.
Docker can go on and on.
And that helps you build out a portfolio.
and so I was like you know what stocks are cool remember I
started to divest from
that once I had my retirement plan in place I was like but I do
like the concept of
the entrepreneurial mindset and so helping these companies get
to the next level
even for my little short amount of time the little small impact
and then being able
to share in the outcomes became a major part of my advisory
work so my advice to
anyone that wants to do advisory work it really helps to be a
domain expert deep
So if a team is about to build out their engineering team and
you've been an
engineering manager or a team lead,
don't just go say,
oh,
when we were at Google,
we did it this way.
That's not what a startup needs.
What a startup needs is you just say,
listen,
as you build out your team,
you have to think about growth trajectory.
You're going to have to think about vesting schedules.
You have to think about personality types, impactful work.
junior versus senior spread when to bring in engineering
leadership when not to
that's the type of advisory that can help accelerate a startup
from one stage to
another stage so then that might be your type of advisory role
so when you meet a
founder and say hey listen here's my domain expertise here's an
impact I can have
and if you think that's going to be good for you at this stage
and don't get
offended if your advisory is no longer necessary because maybe
they're going to
move on to something much different than what you're good at
Let them go get a new set of advisors because you've done your part.
Yeah, I think this is the part of Lowy Eagle, right?
Exactly.
One thing I really appreciated you,
especially that this was very visible after you retired,
that you took intention to understand technologies.
You had some time with crypto where you went deep and tried to
understand it and
asked really good questions.
The community response was a little bit weird, I think hostile.
but i'm not a fan of that specific community but the other
thing that struck me was
with gen.ai as well you of course is everywhere now it's
impacting everyone is
using it trying to trying to figure out how to best use it how
have you gone about
understanding gen.ai especially with your approach of like all
right you know once
a bit of time i'm very much a people person all the way through
and through i'm
very in tune with myself
Again, when I'm cleaning, I'm reflecting.
And so this whole game to me feels like it's not about the ones
and zeros.
I know everyone wants to make it that way.
We judge too much of society based on this.
If you're a billionaire, you're automatically getting respect.
If you have no money, people walk past you without a second look.
And it's unfortunate that it's that way, but I really do think about it.
And the weird thing is,
when you say you think about people,
people find that very odd.
If you're mean, if you're a narcissist on Twitter, that's normal.
That's expected.
If you want to get over with people,
if you want to game the system,
that's normal.
Almost expected.
But when you say,
I want to just be kind to other people,
that feels weird.
People are like, what the hell is this?
No, no, no.
We're all just gaming this thing.
My philosophy around technology really is this people-first situation.
So when crypto came out,
everyone was like,
oh,
we got these tokens,
blah,
blah.
Kelsey is open source, you know, blockchain.
I said, I don't doubt any of these things.
I've been a part of open source movements.
I've been a part of things that maybe have threatened other
people's jobs.
I get it.
But this crypto thing,
I can't help not think about the financial system in a way that
impacts real
people.
Real people are forced to work.
So we go back thousands of years You can go out into the forest
Get something to
eat And that's it Now you have to get a job Because the forest
is off limits So now
we force people into this cycle This is reality Now you're
coming and saying You
want to change the currency Not all of them,
but some of them did So I'm not as concerned about how Blockchain,
crypto That's not as interesting You're saying you want to
change the currency
There have been countries that have gone through currency resets
This is not a nice experience because if you had a little bit of money,
a currency reset can mean you have now no money.
if you had no money it may feel like it's impossible to ever
get any more money if
you're retired what do you do during a currency reset you don't
have any way of
making new money you're retired now so these are very very real
things that I
thought that group of technologists were ignoring because money
go up and so when I
would have those conversations with them they wanted to debate
the low levels of
like
crypto and how transactions are settled and,
you know,
things about encryption and the blockchain.
I was like, yo, that stuff is fine.
We can go back and forth.
But at some point, we have to talk about how it impacts actual people.
When Gen.AI comes out, I'm now super into the philosophy of everything.
So there's one part of this that's a little personal.
Of course,
we spent all of our careers learning all these skills,
training our own models,
right?
We've learned a program.
Yeah, we learned to program.
And it's hard.
Well, not just hard, but there's aesthetics to this.
It's not just blindly typing code.
There's an art form to it.
This is why we have Ruby.
And when you read about Ruby and Matz's vision for having
something that can be
almost romantic to write,
Perl has its own subculture.
Golang has its own culture.
So we're not just writing code.
and my entire career I always thought about writing code as
decision making so
before we do anything we all figure out what needs to happen
and then we have to
convince the computer to do it and every keyword every if
statement every function
call is a decision we're making and of course the syntax kind
of gets in the way
from time to time so Stack Overflow we go
Gen.ai comes out and early stages is kind of like people just
talking to the
machine and I've never been impressed by talking to a computer.
I'd rather talk to real people.
So I don't really care too much about that part.
Yes,
it mimics human capabilities for people that want to talk to a
computer.
Knock yourselves out.
But then we get into the code generation piece.
Now we're back to where I was with the crypto stuff.
I've used the compiler.
It generates a lot of code for me.
I've been doing that for a very long time.
I haven't written any machine code.
And I post things like, hey, I'm adopting the zero token architecture.
People are like, what's zero token architecture?
I was like,
instead of burning tokens,
you learn things and you think for yourself and just complete tasks.
And they're like, oh, why would you want to do that?
I was like, because we taught the machines.
I don't know why people skip this step.
hey Kelsey there's gonna be this artificial intelligence gonna
do all the things
like that we trained it so all those times I'm writing code the
books I've
published the comments back and forth on helping people solve
problems it's all in
there maybe it's arguable that they have their own worldview
based on that and
maybe it's slightly different
but I can never put the machine over a person under any
circumstance and I think
there's a subset I don't want to say everyone in this space is
doing this but there
is a healthy subset of people who really believe what is the
purpose of a person
why do we need them to write code why do we need them to build
software it's like
maybe you don't understand what the job has always been we are
trying to solve
human problems and we use whatever technology is required in
some cases the
technology happens to be software
and software ain't required for every human endeavor.
And I think a lot of people are just in this bubble where they
believe software is
the only way to solve any problem.
And then they think Gen AI solves all human problems.
And this is where I start to push back on that narrative.
It's like, you learn to love this job.
and you forgot what the rest of the world is doing.
And so I feel like some people are now trapped.
And that person,
again,
I keep going back to that person walking into the industry for
the first time.
Luckily for me,
they were looking for people that had skills and there was a pathway,
so many pathways for us.
Now the new generation that's coming out, they're unsure of themselves.
Hey, I'm watching the news.
You guys keep celebrating people just using GNI to do everything.
What am I going to do?
And I just can't accept the answer being,
you're just going to come in here and use Gen.AI to do
everything and all of you
are now just the same.
Okay,
so this is the one that you cannot accept,
but of course you're through advising,
through meeting people,
through talking to people.
What are some of the promising parts that you might see or even
parallels to
previous technology revolutions?
May that be Kubernetes or may that be the...
you know we were moving to like a lot more powerful computers
like when you're
coming out so the way I think about it so for example if I'm
doing due diligence
for the fund that I do due diligence for that means before you
make that decision
to write a check and explain to our LPs why we took this
position we need to do a
little due diligence and we and the way I do due diligence I
want to meet the
founder I would like them to walk me through the particular
product and I go one
step deeper
Let's look at the code.
Let's look at your Amazon bill.
Let's look at the architecture.
Let's look at GitHub.
How do you manage issues?
How do you all work together?
I want to get a sense for the team, the product and its trajectory.
And when AI is involved,
the one thing I just do before the thing kicks off
In this meeting,
do not say AI,
because what we don't want to do is use a big umbrella to
describe what you're
doing.
Let's get concrete details.
These are computers.
These are computer programs.
Yes,
just like when I saw a regular expression for the first time is
a different way of
thinking about software than,
you know,
imperative things,
if else,
then.
So I get that.
But now you have to show me what you're actually doing.
So when we do that, when I put that handicap in place,
Now they're forced to show me the problem they're solving.
They don't just say, hey, AI for healthcare.
Nope.
Show me exactly what you're doing.
And so with that handicap in place,
the really good founders,
the really good technologists,
what they do is they say,
hey,
here's a problem
and hear how an industry currently solves the problem and hear
the drawbacks from that.
And since they can't say AI,
they can't say agentic,
they just have to show me how they make the problem better.
Now, as a technologist, I know that if I gave you a random PDF
there is no easy way for you to procedurally program parsing
PDFs you just can
never anticipate everything you will ever see but it makes
sense to use OCR or if
you don't know what an OCR is you might say I will go use Cloud
to do it whatever
yeah
There's probably an easier way to do this than using a large
language model.
There are smaller models, smaller techniques.
So my advice to them would be,
you know,
you don't need to use an LLM for this.
There are smaller models or smaller AI techniques that are not Gen AI.
So they're like, oh, good feedback.
We can probably lower costs here.
But then when they take these technologies and they do
something novel with it,
I'm like, you know what?
That is a good product for the people doing this work.
And I'll say, you see that?
You did that without saying AI.
So on your website,
why are you burying all the value of this platform by putting
AI in big letters
before we get to the value?
And so maybe they do change the website to actually talk about
the value.
When they do the demos they start with the value versus hand
wavy text boxes where
they put in a prompt and it does something magic.
Physicians don't want to do that.
They want to see some of the other contextual things and
leverage AI to bridge the
gap between what they're currently doing and now what's possible.
So my advice to people that I'm advising,
you know,
all the startups,
I gotta make an AI pivot.
I said, if you all pivot to AI, then you all will have a problem.
It's like kids learning to play soccer.
They all run to the ball, no strategy.
Spread out, figure where you add value and play your position.
So when I'm advising a startup,
what is your position in this big landscape?
You can't all run to the AI ball.
You've got to stand back and figure out which value you're going to add.
So one of the companies I advise, they're called MassDriver.
They have like a visual kind of infrastructures code.
You take Terraform,
you give it some metadata,
and then you can interact with it visually.
And part of that visual interaction allows you to do things
like this app needs this database.
And just drawing that line allows the credentials to flow to
the other app under the hood.
And now you have a config.
Awesome.
So now Cloud is the big thing.
Everyone's like, no, I don't need that.
I don't need Terraform.
I'm just going to use Cloud to manage the cloud.
Now, someone would experience, I'm like, this is about to be real fun.
Because I've seen what humans do when you just give them the
AWS console.
Watch what Cloud's going to do when you give it to AWS console.
And so knowing this,
it's like,
okay,
here's how we can add value to this.
Number one,
we can take the things that you have in this visual box and
split it up into value
props.
Number one, in order to show things visually, you have to have context.
So let's call it
the context engine.
And then that context engine can be queried by cloud.
So instead of pointing at AWS,
it's now pointing at only the resources you use.
And for people to understand why this is important,
if you take some of these agents,
they just start investigating the console like,
ooh,
what's Lambda?
Nah, don't need that.
But Lambda now is now running.
what's this law balance oh don't need that but now that could
be running and you
don't even know the mess that it made yeah they don't even know
the mess that it
made yeah it doesn't even know the mess it's made so now we say
guardrails or give
it context so I said oh okay so instead of doing a full on
pivot in a naive way
let's reposition here
So now some of the features we have become guard routes.
Some of the things the way MassDriver does things with IC or
infrastructure as code
can become skills.
So now if you bring Claude to the scenario,
instead of starting from scratch,
we can just allow the agent to interact with this platform the
same way humans do.
And then what we end up with is if a human wants to interact
visually,
it works.
If you are just like want to have some automation in your pipeline,
then just call the APIs and you still can interact with the
context and the
deployment engines.
But if you really just want to use cloud code,
Then now Claude can interact with the same guardrails and
structure that the rest
of your system does.
And then Claude becomes a little clearer.
We're not asking it to be magic.
We're asking it to be an alternative interface for getting
something done.
Skills.md becomes implementation detail.
And then when we do a webinar where we present this,
just watch the light bulbs go off for the people watching and
for the team
and that to me is the type of advisory where you can look at Gen.A.I.
I'm not just like a Gen.A.I.
hater.
I just don't like the naive promotion and adoption of it.
I think it should be way strategic.
And since I think about Gen.A.I.
as a tool versus the great human replacement,
then I can use it in way more primatic ways.
Thinking about it as a tool
What capabilities do you think it gives us software engineers
specifically?
And also maybe what are some areas where it can maybe give some
overconfidence?
So one thing I've tried to do is to be a little bit more
positive in my thinking
because it would be very easy for me to go down the rabbit hole
of identifying all
of its flaws,
right?
Like,
oh,
look,
it makes mistakes or it hallucinates sometimes or overly
confident gives me a
config that then blows a production.
I'm going to assume those will get slightly better over time or
a human loop will
catch those things.
So I'm going to give it,
for the sake of this discussion,
I'm going to give it a little grace.
The things that I think it should do well that I think don't
get used often enough,
there's this concept where people really think it makes sense
to do inference every
single time.
For example,
if a human writes a piece of code,
we'll write it once,
right?
Let's say I wanted to
authenticate to an endpoint.
So I will call the code,
I'll go look at the documentation,
go to Stack Overflow,
figure out the example.
I'll call it once.
If I had to do this twice,
it's probably gonna become a function that I call multiple
times in the code base.
If I do this like five to 10 times, this may become a library.
that I imported multiple apps.
So that tends to be the human flow because there's no need to
infer or write from
scratch this particular thing.
And we've done that.
That's where open source comes into play.
And when we're really doing a good job,
these things get just baked into the framework.
and they're just there.
Sometimes even in the OS.
In the OS.
And then sometimes things like encryption find its way all the
way to the hardware
where we do offloading.
So this has been the loop that software engineers go through
for a long time.
Gen AI to me should be no different.
So if you find yourself generating the same blocks of code over and over,
even though it feels fast or convenient,
it is still insane.
At some point you should say, whoa,
Why is Cod generating the same block, copying things everywhere?
Because we know where this leads.
Yeah, we've seen that.
Of course we do.
Yeah, and then people get excited about Cod can refactor all of this.
But that's a waste of energy.
There's no reason to do it just because it can.
So I hope what developers are really realizing,
what I realized myself from looking at this is the number one
thing I realized is
that most of our APIs were designed incorrectly,
even for humans.
Right now,
a lot of our APIs,
if I already think about infrastructure,
you have to call like seven APIs to get a VM in the cloud.
Create a VM,
a network,
a storage device connected to a VPC,
and then attach credentials.
That's not intent-based.
I want a VM.
So the first thing you kind of see from this movement is things like MCP,
where we wrap these imperative calls into an intent-based thing
that says,
create a VM,
and then that reflects out to the other ones.
But here's the thing, I saw this before that.
I saw this with Kubernetes.
Kubernetes does the exact same thing.
When you say,
give me an ingress or a service in Kubernetes,
that reflects out to seven calls,
too,
to create load balancers as a cell certificate as DNS setup.
It's just the highest you'd be on the interface, right?
Exactly.
So I've seen this before.
So I'm looking at this like,
guys,
the fundamentals of this isn't like everything is going to
change because of MCP.
What the hell, a whole conference?
Guys, this is just API design.
So in this particular case,
I hope developers realize that we shouldn't have fought so hard
RPC versus REST.
There was this big tug of war around composable APIs.
Like 2000s.
Yeah,
and like a lot of people went down this rabbit hole of like,
create VM.
Oh, it's not flexible enough.
It's like, so what?
Create VM v1, create VM v2, who cares?
Because these are intent-based APIs.
So I think these new tools are reminding us of this.
When I look at the way people are prompting and how they write
their prompts,
a lot of our programming languages were too rigid too to
express what you really
wanted to happen.
We were so afraid maybe Ruby did a better job than some other
languages where they
try to give you things like until.
So that way it was just flowed better as you were writing the code.
Other languages are a bit more rigid.
It's like, what does FN mean?
So you have to go look it up every single time.
So writing code becomes very laborious.
So when people write a natural language prompt,
it kind of tells us a lot about the intentions of querying a database.
So I'm hoping developers learn better API design from that front.
The other part was, I still get frustrated.
I want to learn new technology.
I go to the website.
There's a little bit of documentation,
but for some reason developers still write documentations as hints,
as clues,
right?
I'm trying to learn a new programming language.
I won't throw any of them under the bus.
And I go there and I'm just going to go look at the standard library.
First thing I like to do sometimes is just like,
I'm going to parse a JSON file,
get a feel for the language.
And there's like, there's a JSON library.
Sweet.
We're off to a good start.
Click.
And you look at the documentation, you just see function calls.
I'm like, can I just see a working example?
What do I import?
What do I put in this thing?
What comes out?
And then maybe what do the errors look like?
I just want to see a full example.
They're like, no.
You just get reference.
So then what do we do next?
Then we search the internet.
And you might land on Stack Overflow, someone's blog.
They give you a full example.
So now I've got to copy and paste it and see what this thing
does and hopefully
it's up to date with the actual documentation.
This has been the loop we've been going through for so many years.
So when I use things like Cloud or various tools, they close that loop.
You get the example right here.
And let's not pretend that Stack Overflow examples were perfect.
They were not.
So to me,
like having something where the tool would then try to build it
to tell me if this
is correct syntax or thinking to make sure that it's giving me
a good suggestion,
even I can say that is an improvement.
But I hope we learned that maybe we should not just give hints
in the official documentation.
I'm watching people write these huge markdown files to give the
agent context.
How about you write documentation to give me context so I can
have fully working examples?
With agents,
we could actually generate documentation a lot more
intentionally.
As devs, most of us just don't like...
I'm not sure if there's anyone who likes writing documentation.
We don't like doing this.
We don't like writing tests.
In general, these tools can help with that.
But this is where I think we tend to make a mistake.
I remember when I was learning Java for the first time,
and the Java developer was like,
we don't write docs,
the code is self-documenting.
I was like, no, it's not.
It's just documenting hints.
I still have no context.
Because to me,
again,
software development is to me a human endeavor assisted by
tools.
And so there's a style to documentation.
There's a personality to documentation.
It's like a movie, like you're trying to educate a person.
I don't want just hints of, hey, this thing exists for these reasons.
We conform to this particular specification.
There are multiple ways to write this code.
Here's the most popular way.
here's what bad code looks like here's what high performance
code looks like here's
when to use this library here's when not to use this library I
want that kind of in
depth as I'm training my own model and what I'm seeing now is
which I think is a
good thing people are writing a lot more documentation to be
consumed by the agent
to give it context I was like man I wish we had the same
motivation just a decade
ago because I think a lot of us would have been way more
productive if we didn't
have to try to do a wild goose chase every time
Well,
interesting enough,
Kat Cosgrove told me that one of the reasons she thinks Kubernetes 1 was
documentation.
They take it extremely seriously.
Few other projects, if any, does it at that level.
So just proving a point.
One thing that a lot of experienced software engineers are
worried about right now
is all the AI.
We're all using AI agents.
They do generate code really quickly.
which is something writing code used to take a lot of effort it
took a lot long
time to be good at it now with code reviews there's now more
tools coming in and
some people are like worried like okay like what is happening
to my profession like
the craft of writing code seems to be
something that we can offload and more and more people are
offloading including
prominent people what will this do to software engineering and
what advice would
you give to people who are experienced software engineers
they're a little bit
worried because it's a big shift they still want to be whatever
great engineer will
look like in the future but what steps might be able to take
and I especially like
your take because I think you're pretty grounded in just
looking at this from a
vantage point that some of us are not
I think as a software developer,
the first step you have to do is have a bit of reflection.
The last 20,
30 years,
you have been automating a lot of industries away yourself.
All those programs,
I remember seeing,
maybe it was like a diagram of every device that has been
replaced by the iPhone.
The radio,
the calculator,
the compass,
all of these tools people used to buy individually.
The top 30 of those electronics from the last 40 years are all
in your iPhone,
all of them.
That means some electronic makers have gone out of business.
They're gone.
You did that.
Not in a malicious way, but you were part of that.
And so the software developer has been glorified for a very long time.
The internet,
some people would say,
caused the downfall of magazines and newspapers because of the
convenience of
having a software approach.
And so you have been part of
the change to other industries and other people yourself.
What did you think about that?
Did you even think about it at all?
So let's not be surprised if you find no sympathy from all the
other professions
that you've helped force change upon.
So I think that's step one.
You have to go do that reflection because if you don't do that
reflection,
you won't know how to behave now.
You're going to be complaining and people are going to look at
you crazy because
where was this empathy before?
You might be very excited about this,
and not realize you're only excited because you're in position
to benefit from this.
So if you work at an Anthropic,
of course this is the future because it's in your hands.
If you're at NVIDIA,
of course this is the future because you will be selling the
picks and shovels.
And so you got to ask yourself, why am I excited?
Now,
what I don't want you to do is necessarily feel guilty about it,
but I need you to see the big,
big picture.
It's going to help frame everything else.
The second thing I want you to do is ask yourself, what was my job?
Remember, there was a point in my career where I was lying to myself.
I thought my job was to be the best Linux administrator ever.
You as a software developer,
you may have thought your job was to be the only person in an
organization that can
write code.
And since no one else could do it, you are safe.
right and so you didn't learn any other skills networking
product management design
talking to customers nope all you had to do was write code and
you were safe and
you probably made more money than everybody and you were fine
with that now you got
caught the only thing you were good at is now been commoditized
again you did this
to others so let's say the vision you have for yourself is only
in this very narrow
realm
You're going to be very afraid of this trajectory because all
you know is software
developers write code.
That's it.
Some software developers still don't write tests,
still don't know how to deploy anything.
And so they are really afraid because they can't see any other
way that this plays out.
Now if you're a full stack engineer you're probably like man
there's so much more
than just writing code you have to do architecture you have to
do design you have
to do so many other things that I love Claude because now I can
focus on those
things and I can use these tools instead so I can see why that
person would have
that perspective
Now,
I understand why that full stack person has a perspective of
watching the same
people commentate that the code generation piece replaces
everything else.
They're going to be like, no, you don't know what this job is.
It's way more than just writing code.
Writing code is the last step.
If you're a security engineer,
you're probably like,
we never figured out security for the pace of the current enterprise.
The one before?
Yeah, like...
Everyone thinks they're moving slow.
I remember I took a security training thing and most of them
aren't that good
because they can't go super deep.
They just tell you, hey, here's how to avoid phishing.
Here's how to not leak information,
adhere to various laws and things like that.
And then they said one thing this time that I learned that was
pretty good.
What's the key to protecting yourself?
And they say, you know what?
Just go slow.
A lot of attacks are, I'm about to board a flight.
and let's say you're an admin or you're a VP and the CEO texts you,
right now we need to wire the money to Oracle to pay for the license.
They're going to cut it off.
Right now, this needs to be done immediately.
You look at your phone, it's definitely from the phone number of the CEO.
You have a good relationship.
Everything looks right and it's moving fast.
So you're like, man, I'm on a 10-hour flight.
I need to do this now.
Turns out the attacker knows you're about to board this flight.
They've seen all your previous text messages They know how your
manager talks to
you They know that you've moved fast in the past And so they
now are primed to get
you to do the exact same behavior again And you could be the VP
of security So you
should know better And sometimes that naive confidence will
make you feel like I'm
obviously not being phished
I've done this many times.
This is definitely the CEO.
Who would know how we actually operate?
And who would know that I can actually do that?
So what do you do?
You'd make the transfer.
And just like that,
10 million has been wired to the wrong place because you moved
fast.
It wasn't because you were not smart.
It wasn't because you were not productive because in this case,
you were productive,
but you did the wrong thing.
So when I think about code,
There is value in having a healthy pace.
Let's say you're an insurance company.
You sell insurance.
Hey, make model.
How old are you?
Have you had any accidents?
Okay.
Here is your insurance for the year.
Simple.
Very simple thing.
If you're an insurance company and that's all you are,
you're kind of close to being done.
Now you could say, with Gen AI, we should get into payments.
We should compete with DoorDash, right?
We have all these tools.
Let's go and... We could build it.
Yeah, we can build it.
So the thing is, should you just build it because you can?
And the answer is typically no.
So we usually optimize ourselves as humans around the pace
needed for the task.
And when we don't need to do that work anymore,
we move on to something else.
So now I think what we're going to end up with is people not
realizing a lot of
this stuff we were doing in software engineering was decision making.
What database to use.
what schema should we really collect someone's social security
number or should we
avoid it not yeah I can write code to parse the social security
number really fast
no no no should you even do it and so when you write code it
almost makes you slow
down again because there's been times where I thought I had a
good design that's
that phrase writing this thinking so is writing code so as
you're writing the code
you're like hey wait a minute
This loop is ridiculous, right?
Not only is it going to make the computer warm,
this is not the right thing to do.
There's a better data structure than the algorithm that I'm using.
So then you stop and say, hey, the data structure is wrong.
We need to change the way we print receipts on the cash register.
Sure, I can write this code, but this is the wrong data structure.
While I can generate the code, doing reports are going to be a nightmare.
Summarizing this data downstream is going to be a nightmare.
Stop everything.
Now that I've thought about it,
we need to change the architecture from the top down.
So decision making sometimes does benefit from slow.
And when I'm saying slow here, we're not talking waterfall six months.
We're just talking about maybe one more day before you go at it.
And I think some of us are going to miss that part because
clots fit it out.
Ship it.
Yeah,
and that's also one thing that you always have the more
experienced generation be
worried about the young generation.
I remember when I joined the industry, ReSharper had come out.
ReSharper,
and the experience of the old guard was like,
nah,
you're not a real developer if you use ReSharper because you're
not going to learn
the library and you need that.
And that's what makes you a real developer.
And then I remember when I was now,
You know,
five plus years of experience and stack overflow started to
become big.
And I was like,
nah,
you don't want to go to stack overflow because you're not going to,
you know,
learn the real thing.
So,
but now what the current old guard is saying,
which is,
you know,
where I'm,
I guess I'm part of it is like,
well,
if you use AI,
you're going to miss learning the basics.
And when you have learned the basics, it's so much easier to use AI.
And I wonder if we're just repeating the same mistake as the
previous ones did,
which is the new generation usually figures out the tools,
they understand how to do it,
or are we rightly concerned that some people who are coming
into this AI native,
they're now learning to code,
they can jump through so many layers that they will just not
see what's under,
understand,
or are we just making assumptions that might not be true?
Here's where I think it can be right on both sides.
Do you need to learn how to code to make an impact in this industry?
The answer is no.
You do not have to.
There are some people who use these no-code platforms where
they drag and drop and
they produce a really good app.
There are some people who have built a consultancy business by
just using Wix,
right?
They go there, their website actually looks pretty good.
and so they got really far with that.
Now for what they're trying to do and accomplish in life,
they'll probably be fine.
But let's just say you are a software engineer and the idea
behind software
engineer is not limited to just producing apps.
Software is the interface between hardware and things people want to do.
So there's a whole bunch of things you need to learn.
So if you want to be that type of software engineer,
you're going to learn hardware too.
If you don't understand hardware, you can never work at that level.
And look, if that's not your job, then so be it.
But you will never have that creativity.
I remember seeing someone was like,
hey,
you can do isolation without a VM.
I was like, how would you do that?
He's like,
oh,
because when you boot the kernel,
there's a thing you can do before the kernel loads to isolate
it in a way that you
can lock down processes.
The only reason why this person knows is they know the full
boot sequence from
firmware to switching to the kernel and the tricks you can do in between.
Now, for me, that doesn't work at that depth.
I'm thinking there's only virtualization CPU isolation things
like G-Visor where
you intercept system calls but never did I think about the boot
sequence and so yes
you can get very far but as someone like we applaud every
version of Opus that's
released or ChatGPT but there are versions of yourself that get
deeper from these
new trainings so no you don't have to but if you ever want to
get better at
anything and sometimes that depth that nuance is the thing that
leads to an
invention
If you know how a compiler works,
if you know how memory management works,
that might give you enough information to say,
oh,
I can make a new programming language.
If the only thing you know is the surface,
you can't even imagine how you can create another programming
language that is a
better fit for the task at hand because you've never gone that deep.
I'm not saying everyone wants to do that,
so I think it is fair to say all I want to do is come in,
get a job,
and if that job can be done by using AI tools,
I think the side effect of that is, then that job will be commoditized.
It has to.
That's just the way it's going to go.
But I've always seen myself for my entire career, I want to learn more.
I want to go deeper.
I want to go so deep that I can create.
And I think a lot of people who are doing this,
the reason why we're having this reaction,
some of us,
part of our careers have been the creation part.
There is no speck for this.
There's no protocol for this.
We're gonna make it work.
A lot of people that are doing like the reverse engineering,
the hacking,
there's like,
there's no framework for what I'm about to do.
I just know how memory works and I don't care what your
security tool does.
I will make it do what I want it to do.
You need to go way below the surface.
And so for a lot of us that are saying this,
we know the value of the fundamentals that lead to the other stuff.
And so if you tell the next generation,
Oh, you don't need to learn these things.
It's like,
that may be right in the short term,
but we know for a fact your career will be limited.
And that may not be a problem and you have to decide.
But make no mistake,
if we put this much effort in training the model so that it can
spit things out,
you better make sure that you are willing to train your own
model so my advice to
people would be and maybe we should talk about it different
maybe we shouldn't have
so much fear mongering around it maybe we wouldn't should put
it a versus this we
should just say great artists tend to know how to mix colors
and it isn't your
benefit to understand the primary colors so you can mix them to
get the other
colors
and it's a superpower, right?
So you don't have to go buy,
you know,
imagine an artist trying to go buy 16 million colors and put
them on a desk because
they don't know how to mix colors.
If you teach a person how to mix colors, you can get any color you want.
And I think that's the way we have to approach it.
It's just another skill that if you had it,
you might just unlock some creativity.
So I encourage you to learn it.
Kelsey, thank you very much.
This was just an amazing conversation.
Awesome.
Thanks for having me.
I will admit I was glued to my chair for the whole of the conversation.
Apologies that it took this long,
but I hope you agree that this specific one was worth it.
Kelsey's past was just so unlikely.
He's someone who was raised by a single mother,
dropped out of college in favor of installing DSL lines
door-to-door at 19,
and still ended up as Distinguished Engineer at Google Cloud.
Only a few hundred people who hold a title at the company.
And he retired at the top three years ago when he decided that
he no longer needs
to work for others.
What an inspiration.
One thing I took notes on was when Kelsey said how every job is
an interview.
When Kelsey was giving that gophercon talk and PXE booting
CoreOS from his slide
deck,
he had no idea that the CoreOS team was sitting in the audience,
and that's how he ended up at CoreOS.
When he was contributing to Puppet at nights and weekends,
he didn't know that James Turnbull would walk into his office
one day and recognize
his name.
He just kept showing up and doing the work in public.
It's a lesson worth remembering.
Do the best work you can at work.
It might unknowingly be your job interview for your next step
in your career.
I also found the Microsoft offer fascinating.
Kelsey did not use the offer from Microsoft as an ultimatum at Google,
even though he could have.
He just told his manager the truth, and then Google matched the offer.
Obviously,
at this high level,
there's no universal compensation negotiating advice that always works.
Being a straight shooter with high integrity is something that
is good to keep in mind.
I was also inspired by Kelsey's focus on minimalism.
He treats money as freedom tokens and made sure that his
lifestyle never inflated
with his salary so that early retirement was always a real option,
not just fantasy.
Finally, Kelsey's AI takes.
His point is grounded and pragmatic.
AI does not change what software engineering is
If you enjoyed this podcast,
please do subscribe on your favorite podcast platform and on YouTube.
A special thank you if you also leave a rating on the show.
Thanks and see you in the next one.